i

y
t
e
c
o
S

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
N
e
h
t

f

o

i

s
g
n
d
e
e
c
o
r
P

Proceedings of the Nutrition Society (2008), 67, 253–256
g The Author 2008 First published online 1 May 2008

doi:10.1017/S002966510800712X

The Annual Meeting of the Nutrition Society and the British Association for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition was held at Harrogate

International Centre, Harrogate on 27–28 November 2007

Nutrition Society and BAPEN Medical Symposium on ‘Nutrition support in

cancer therapy’

The Second World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer

Research Expert Report. Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the

Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective

World Cancer Research Fund International, London, UK and University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 7PX, UK

Martin Wiseman

It has been estimated by various authorities that about one-third of cancers in Western
high-income societies are attributable to factors relating to food, nutrition and physical activity.
Identifying with conﬁdence speciﬁc associations between dietary patterns,
foods, body
composition or individual nutrients is not simple because of the long latent period for cancer
development,
its complex pathogenesis and the challenge of characterising the multi-
dimensional aspects of diet and activity over a lifetime. Reliable conclusions must therefore
be drawn not only from randomised controlled trials but from a variety of methodological
approaches,
judged within a classic framework for inferring causality. Using a newly-
developed method with a protocol for standardising the literature search and for analysis and
display of the evidence, nine independent academic centres have conducted systematic reviews
addressing the causal associations between food, nutrition and physical activity and risk of
development of seventeen cancers, as well as of weight gain and obesity. A review has also
examined the efﬁcacy of such interventions in subjects with cancer. The reviews have been
assessed by an independent Panel of twenty-one international experts who drew conclusions
with grades of conﬁdence in the causality of associations and made recommendations.
Recommendations are given as public health goals as well as for individuals.

Cancer prevention: Systematic literature reviews: Expert recommendations

In the UK cancer accounts for about one-quarter of all
deaths, second only to CVD(1). Although survival
is
increasing with improved management, many cancers still
carry a poor prognosis as they are less susceptible to sur-
gical, radiotherapeutic or chemotherapeutic intervention,
either because of their inherent characteristics or because
they may be detected at a late stage of development.

The most common cancers are diseases of adulthood,
becoming especially more common in older age. As the
population ages cancer prevalence is therefore predicted to
increase. Consequently, a policy of managing the burden of
cancer in the population based entirely on screening for
early detection and management of detected cancers is
unlikely to make a marked impact at a population level

except for a few types of cancer, and is also likely to be
increasingly, and unsustainably, expensive.

Thus, it is important to consider the role for primary
prevention in helping to reduce the clinical, personal,
economic and social burden of cancer. Approximately one-
third of all cancers in high-income countries such as the
UK are attributed to smoking(2). Authoritative reviews
have further estimated that about one-third of all cancers
in such countries might be attributable to factors relating
to food, nutrition and physical activity, including body
fatness.

In 1997 the World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF),
together with its sister organisation the American Institute
for Cancer Research, published a landmark report Food,

Abbreviations: SLR, systematic literature reviews; WCRF, World Cancer Research Fund.
Corresponding author: Professor Martin Wiseman, fax + 44 20 7343 4220, email m.wiseman@wcrf.org

i

y
t
e
c
o
S

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
N
e
h
t

f

o

i

s
g
n
d
e
e
c
o
r
P

254

M. Wiseman

Nutrition and the Prevention of Cancer: a Global
Perspective(3). This report has become the most author-
itative statement on the topic and a basis for academics,
researchers and policy-makers worldwide, and has been
followed by a surge in research on the nutritional links
with cancer.

In view of the burgeoning body of evidence, in 2001
WCRF and American Institute for Cancer Research
embarked on a new report to ensure that its recommend-
ations remained a sound basis for its own and others’
activities. This report was published in November 2007(4).

Nutrition and the cancer process

Cancer develops from a clone of cells that have escaped
normal regulation of growth, proliferation, differentiation
and intercellular
relationships. These abnormalities of
function derive from disordered expression of key genes,
resulting in altered cellular phenotype. The disordered
gene expression may result from genetic mutation or from
epigenetic factors that may silence genes that should be
active or switch on genes that should be silent. Factors
relating to food and nutrition may directly inﬂuence both
processes.

Food components may act directly as mutagens, or
conversely may interfere with the action of external
mutagens either directly or by facilitating their elimination.
Nutritional factors may also alter the cellular milieu by
modulating hormonal axes, and so inﬂuencing growth and
proliferation amongst speciﬁc cell populations. Finally,
regulation of processes related to speciﬁc nutrients may
directly inﬂuence the expression of key genes, for instance
through abnormalities of methylation of
the promoter
regions of genes or of histone acetylation, which can
inﬂuence DNA structure and accessibility of genes to
mRNA for transcription.

interaction between genotype

While it is clear that at root cancer is a disease of gene
expression, only a minority of cancers appear to be related
to inherited single high-penetrance gene mutations. Con-
sequently, a major determinant of cancer risk appears to be
the
and environment.
Amongst the earliest identiﬁed indicators of the importance
of this interaction are the different patterns of cancer
around the world. Low-income countries have relatively
high rates of cancers of the cervix, stomach, liver and
oro-pharynx (all of which are at least partly related to
infections), while high-income countries are characterised
by higher rates of cancers of the breast, prostate and colo-
rectum (related to alterations in hormonal axes)(4). Most
striking is the rapid change in cancer patterns, within one
or two generations, when populations migrate. Together
with the secular changes in the incidence of some cancers
over only decades, this rapid change effectively excludes
inherited factors as a key determinant of these patterns at a
population level, although clearly they may be important in
determining individual risk within populations.

The rationale for considering food, nutrition and physi-
cal activity as key environmental factors in determining
cancer risk derives from a mass of epidemiological and
mechanistic data, and more recently with some clinical
trials as well. The second WCRF/American Institute for

Cancer Research report was commissioned with an expert
Panel to review this evidence, to draw conclusions and to
make recommendations.

The process for the report

Cancer is the result of a complex process of accumulation
of abnormal phenotypic characteristics among a clone of
cells, usually over decades. This complexity and timescale
present obstacles to the study of its pathogenesis and
natural history, especially during the preclinical stages.
Equally, it is challenging to characterise subjects’ exposure
to food and nutrients, and their trajectory of growth and
body composition, over the life course. In these circum-
stances, clinical
trials cannot realistically address more
than a short period of the whole pathogenetic process and
are usually conducted in high-risk groups who may not be
representative of the general population. Often dietary
intervention is in the form of isolated supplements rather
than real foods, as it is difﬁcult to achieve or maintain
differences between intervention and control groups for
real dietary or physical activity interventions.

Consequently, it is difﬁcult to identify single methodo-
logical approaches that can be seen as inherently superior.
With a body of evidence comprising very different
approaches,
from observational epidemiology to basic
science, and where the generalisability of clinical trials is
limited, robust conclusions can only be drawn from a
review of the totality of the relevant evidence, allowing for
the advantages and disadvantages of different methods.
There are accepted approaches to synthesising such evi-
dence and inferring the likely causality of observed associ-
ations, such as that proposed in 1963 by Bradford Hill(5).
With a view to exploring the literature so that Bradford
Hill’s framework could be applied, WCRF International
convened an expert Task Force to develop a standardised
method for searching the literature and for analysing and
displaying the evidence. This methodology Task Force met
over 2 years to develop such a speciﬁcation.

The feasibility, utility and reproducibility of the speciﬁ-
cation manual was tested and compared between two
independent academic institutes, using endometrial cancer
as a test case. As a result amendments were made to the
protocol, and the ﬁnal version(6) was used to conduct the
series of systematic literature reviews (SLR) that formed
the basis of the Panel’s deliberations.

It was decided to keep the process of data collection,
analysis and display separate from that of judging it. Thus,
nine independent SLR centres, three in the USA, four in
the UK and two in continental Europe, were commissioned
to conduct SLR on the links between food, nutrition and
physical activity and seventeen cancer sites. In addition,
SLR were conducted on the links with weight gain and
body fatness and the efﬁcacy of nutrition and activity
interventions in individuals who had already received
a diagnosis of cancer. Finally, a review was conducted
on authoritative national and international reports that
had made recommendations for the prevention of other
diseases, so that any recommendations from this report
would be set in a broad public health context.

i

y
t
e
c
o
S

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
N
e
h
t

f

o

i

s
g
n
d
e
e
c
o
r
P

Nutrition support in cancer therapy

255

Each SLR team had to include a range of expertise,
in nutrition, epidemiology, statistics, cancer biology, the
speciﬁc cancer site and systematic review. Each SLR was
peer reviewed at the protocol and draft ﬁnal report stage.
WCRF International provided a coordinator whose role
was to facilitate the process and ensure consistency in
application of the speciﬁcation.

An expert Panel was convened, comprising twenty-one
internationally-renowned scientists, with a range of exper-
tise including nutrition, epidemiology, cancer mechanisms,
clinical medicine and public health. Chaired by Professor
Sir Michael Marmot, the Panel met over 5 years to discuss
and judge the evidence from the SLR, to draw conclusions
and to make recommendations.

Judging the evidence

Given the complex nature both of the disease process of
cancer and of the characterisation of diet and physical
activity over a lifetime, a simple hierarchical approach
to evidence on causal links cannot rely on randomised
controlled trials. Apart from the obvious inability to mask
differences in dietary interventions based on real foods, in
practical terms it is equally impossible to secure sufﬁ-
ciently large or sustained differences in lifestyle including
diet between intervention groups. Where such studies are
done they often use synthetic supplements of isolated
nutrients, at high dose, in high-risk groups, with inter-
mediate outcomes. Extrapolation from such studies to
the general population is not
therefore straightforward.
However, long-term observational studies of cohorts of
healthy individuals can identify hard outcomes (cancer
incidence or mortality) in typical populations consuming
real diets over decades. Observational studies, however,
unlike randomised trials, are subject
to confounding,
making causal inferences less robust.

The issue of identifying important causal associations
from predominantly observational data where trials are
uninformative is not new. Bradford Hill
in the 1960s
elucidated a series of characteristics of the data that could
provide a framework for consideration to help infer which
associations are likely to be causal(7). The SLR speciﬁc-
ation required the data to be displayed in a way that
facilitated the application of Bradford Hill’s criteria. The
evidence displayed was then judged within that framework,
and the likelihood of any association being causal was
graded according to how well the criteria were fulﬁlled.

Before any evidence was presented, the Panel agreed a
set of minimum criteria for each grade. The grades were:
convincing; probable; limited; substantial effect on risk
unlikely. The limited category was further divided into
where it was suggestive of a causal relation and where no
conclusion could be drawn. In addition, to provide ﬂexi-
bility, certain characteristics of the evidence could be used
to upgrade or downgrade conclusions.

Once conclusions were reached, they were presented
graphically in the form of a matrix. Matrices were pre-
sented for each cancer, with all
identiﬁed exposures
categorised according to the grade of conclusion as to the
likely causality of the association. In addition, matrices
were presented for each main group of exposures, with

Table 1. Headline recommendations of the expert Panel convened
to discuss and judge the evidence from the systematic literature

reviews, to draw conclusions and to make recommendations

Category

Body fatness

Physical activity

Foods and drinks that
promote weight gain

Plant foods
Animal foods

Recommendation

Be as lean as possible within the

normal range of body weight
Be physically active as part of

everyday life

Limit consumption of energy-dense

foods

Avoid sugary drinks
Eat mostly foods of plant origin
Limit intake of red meat and avoid

processed meat

Alcoholic drinks
Preservation, processing,

preparation

Dietary supplements

Limit alcoholic drinks
Limit consumption of salt
Avoid mouldy cereals or pulses
Aim to meet nutritional needs through

diet alone

Breast-feeding

Mothers to breast-feed; children to be

Cancer survivors

Follow the recommendations for

cancer prevention

breast-fed

the speciﬁc exposure–cancer links categorised according
to their likely causality (although excluding the large
category of limited–no conclusion).

Once agreed, these conclusions provided the basis for
making recommendations. Recommendations were based
only on conclusions for which the likely causality was
judged probable or convincing.

Making recommendations

Recommendations were developed by the Panel with the
aim of being as far as possible applicable throughout the
world. Where evidence was speciﬁc to particular local
circumstances this fact was stated. In addition, all recom-
mendations were considered within the context of the
review of authoritative expert reports on other diseases, to
ensure that they were conducive generally to public health
and not restricted to cancer prevention.

The Panel made ten recommendations. Each recom-
mendation has a title to identify the broad category of
food, nutrition or physical activity addressed. This title is
followed by a brief headline to provide a sense of the
essence of the recommendation, but without detail or
quantiﬁcation. Each recommendation then has a public
health goal or goals, directed to policy-makers or health
professionals with the aim of facilitating policies or pro-
grammes and quantiﬁed to aid target setting and monitor-
ing of progress. This public health goal is followed by
personal recommendations as a basis for the population (as
communities, families or individuals) to make decisions
about their own diet and lifestyle, also quantiﬁed where
possible.

Each of these recommendations is accompanied by
explanatory footnotes, which should be considered an
integral part of the recommendation.

The headline recommendations are shown in Table 1.

256

M. Wiseman

Looking to the future

The conclusions and recommendations of the Panel set out
in the report form a robust basis for further research and
for public and professional education programmes. WCRF
is preparing materials and other resources that begin this
process.

However, scientiﬁc evidence is continually accumulat-
ing, and each new study needs to be considered in the
context of the existing evidence. Thus, WCRF has com-
missioned a group from Imperial College, London, UK to
combine the existing databases produced by the cancer-site
SLR, and to update them as new information accrues. This
process is overseen by a panel of independent experts, and
will be accompanied by periodic reports of updated con-
clusions and of the implications for the recommendations.
Furthermore, while food, nutrition and physical activity
are proximate causes of patterns of cancer, and of other
chronic diseases,
is clear that patterns of food con-
sumption and of activity are themselves determined by
powerful social, cultural, political and economic factors.
A further report to be published in November 2008 will
address the evidence for determinants of such patterns
and for what might be effective in inﬂuencing them. This
report, Policy and Action for Cancer Prevention: Food,
Nutrition, and Physical Activity – a Global Perspective,
will explore the evidence in a similarly rigorous way and
make further recommendations for policies and actions to
politicians, policy-makers, health professionals and others.

it

Conclusions

The 2007 WCRF/American Institute for Cancer Research
Report Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Pre-
vention of Cancer: a Global Perspective was produced by

i

y
t
e
c
o
S

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
N
e
h
t

f

o

i

s
g
n
d
e
e
c
o
r
P

an independent Panel, based on systematic reviews con-
ducted by independent academic institutions and conducted
transparently according to the most rigorous procedures.
It represents the most authoritative review of the topic ever
produced and is the most robust current basis for research,
education and policy.

Acknowledgements

I have no conﬂict of interest. I act as a paid consultant
to WCRF International, and was project director for the
WCRF/ACIR 2007 Report.

References

1. World Health Organization (2006) WHO Global Infobase.
http://www.who.int/infobase/report.aspx?iso=GBR&rid=119&
goButton=Go

2. Cancer Research UK (2007) Tobacco and cancer risk. http://
info.cancerresearchuk.org/cancerstats/causes/lifestyle/tobacco/
3. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer
Research (1997) Food, Nutrition and the Prevention of Can-
cer: a Global Perspective. Washington, DC: AICR.

4. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer
Research (2007) Food, Nutrition, and Physical Activity, and
the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective. Washington,
DC: AICR.

5. Bradford Hill A (1963) Medical ethics and controlled trials.

Br Med J ii, 1043–1049.

6. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer
Research (2006) Systematic literature review speciﬁcation
manual
http://www.dietandcancerreport.org/
downloads/SLR_Manual.pdf

version

15.

7. Bradford Hill A (1967) Principles of Medical Statistics.

London: The Lancet Ltd.

2150

Short Communication

Low-Fat, Low-Glycemic Load Diet and Gene Expression in
Human Prostate Epithelium: A Feasibility Study of
Using cDNA Microarrays to Assess the Response
to Dietary Intervention in Target Tissues

Daniel W. Lin,1,3 Marian L. Neuhouser,1 Jeannette M. Schenk,1 Ilsa M. Coleman,2
Sarah Hawley,1 David Gifford,2 Hau Hung,2 Beatrice S. Knudsen,1
Peter S. Nelson,2 and Alan R. Kristal1,4

Divisions of 1Public Health Sciences and 2Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, and Departments of
3Urology and 4Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington

Abstract

Purpose: We examined the feasibility of using gene
expression changes in human prostate epithelium as a
measure of response to a dietary intervention.
Materials and Methods: Eight men with newly diag-
nosed prostate cancer were randomized to a low-fat/
low-glycemic load intervention arm (<20% energy from
fat and total daily glycemic load <100) or a ‘‘standard

American’’ control arm (35% energy from fat and total
daily glycemic load >200). Prostate tissue was collected
before randomization and f6 weeks later, at the time
of radical prostatectomy. Epithelium was acquired by
laser capture microdissection, and transcript abun-
dance levels were measured by cDNA microarray
hybridization and confirmed by quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR.
Results: Men in the intervention arm consumed 39%
less total energy (P = 0.004) and the difference in

weight change between intervention and control arms

was  6.1 kg (P = 0.02). In the intervention arm, 23
(0.46%) of 5,711 cDNAs with measurable expression
were significantly altered (P < 0.05; false discovery rate,
V10%). In the control arm, there were no significant
changes in transcript expression, even when using a
false discovery rate as high as 50%.
Conclusions: A 6-week, low-fat/low-glycemic load diet
was associated with significant gene expression
changes in human prostate epithelium. These results
show the feasibility of using prostate tissues collected
at diagnosis and at surgery to study the effects of
dietary manipulation on prostate tissue, which may
give insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying
the associations of diet and obesity with the develop-
(Cancer
ment or progression of prostate cancer.
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16(10):2150 – 4)

Introduction

There is good evidence that obesity and perhaps, a high
fat intake, due to its strong correlation with obesity,
increase the risk of high-grade or aggressive prostate
cancer, prostate cancer mortality, and the risk of poor
outcome following diagnosis and treatment (1-3). How-
ever, the molecular mechanisms underlying these asso-
ciations remains largely unknown. Experimental animal
and in vitro studies have shown that dietary patterns and

Received 2/18/07; revised 7/19/07; accepted 8/6/07.
Grant support: DK65083 (D.W. Lin), the Pacific Northwest Prostate Cancer
Specialized Programs of Research Excellence CA97186 (D.W. Lin and P.S. Nelson),
and the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center P30 CA015704.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Requests for reprints: Daniel W. Lin, Department of Urology, University of
Washington, Box 356510, 1959 Northeast Pacific Street, Seattle, WA 98195.
Phone: 206-667-1342; Fax: 206-667-2917. E-mail: dlin@u.washington.edu
Copyright D 2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-0154

food constituents can affect gene expression, protein
synthesis, cell signaling, and other important events
related to carcinogenesis (4-6). In humans, however, it is
difficult to test hypotheses related to the mechanisms
and pathways that underlie diet and cancer associations
because appropriate tissues are rarely available. Human
studies are generally limited to measuring circulating
biomarkers, such as serum steroid hormones, which
are influenced by diet and are associated with carcino-
genesis.

The objective of this pilot study was to evaluate the
feasibility of a randomized clinical trial to test whether
short-term modifications in macronutrient intake could
modify gene expression in prostate epithelium. We
examined the effects of a low-fat/low-glycemic load
diet in men with clinically localized prostate cancer
who elected prostatectomy as their primary treatment
choice. These results will help in the design of studies
using gene expression or gene expression signatures as
measures of the effect of dietary change on prostate
cancer biology.

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16(10). October 2007

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2007 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

2151

Materials and Methods

Participants were men with clinically localized prostate
cancer, who elected to undergo radical prostatectomy
and received no neoadjuvant therapy. Study activities
began within 2 weeks of diagnosis.

Eligibility criteria included the ability to implement
dietary change, no concurrent disease requiring dietary
modification, no current use of hormonal treatments, and
body mass index >20 kg/m2 and <35 kg/m2. In addition,
men had to have participated in an independent protocol
that collected and stored four prostate tissue cores at the
time of diagnostic prostate biopsy. Both the dietary
intervention and biopsy tissue collection protocols were
approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the
Veterans Administration, Puget Sound Health Care
System and the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, and all patients signed written informed con-
sents. Study was completed between August 2003 and
November 2004.

Randomization and Dietary Intervention. Partici-
pants were randomly assigned to one of two groups:
group I received instructions to follow a low-fat/low-
glycemic load diet (<20% energy from fat and total daily
glycemic load <100) and group II was instructed to
follow a ‘‘standard American’’ diet (35% energy from fat
and total daily glycemic load >200). A detailed descrip-
tion of the intervention is available from the authors
upon request. In brief, participants were provided a
dietary intervention manual
focused on meal
planning. For individuals randomized to the low-fat/
low-glycemic load diet, the study nutritionist provided
detailed instructions and worked with the participant to
plan at least three meals. Participants randomized to the
standard American group were asked to continue their
usual dietary habits, using lists of prohibited and
permitted foods as a guideline for food choices. During
the first week, the nutritionist made up to five follow-up
telephone calls to review the intervention materials and
provide additional meal planning support; calls were
made at least once per week thereafter.

that

Dietary and Anthropometric Assessment. Unsched-
uled, telephone-administered 24-h dietary recalls were
completed each week to assess adherence to the study
diet, using the University of Minnesota’s Nutrition Data
Systems for Research software (version 37, 2006).
Interviewers were blinded to the randomization assign-
ment. On the days of randomization and prostatectomy,
participants were weighed by study staff on a beam
balance scale. Height was measured using a standing
stadiometer. Body mass index was calculated as weight
(kg) / height (m)2.

Clinical Specimens. At the time of biopsy and after
acquiring 12 diagnostic prostate cores, we obtained four
additional tissue cores from the peripheral zone. At the
time of radical prostatectomy, the prostate was exposed
via a midline incision, and we obtained four in situ
prostate biopsy cores using an 18-gauge prostate needle
biopsy gun (Bard Inc.). All biopsies were collected from
the peripheral zone and immediately embedded and
frozen as described below. Because our study was
limited to the effects of diet on normal epithelium, we
attempted to intraoperatively biopsy sites that did not

contain malignant epithelium, corresponding to sites
from diagnostic biopsy specimens. The in situ samples
were collected before removing the prostate because we
previously found that surgical manipulation caused
artifactual changes in gene expression (7).

Specimen Handling and Laser Capture Microdis-
section. Biopsy cores were embedded individually in
polyethylene glycol freezing media (Tissue-Tek OCT
Compound, Sakura Finetek), placed in isopentane that
was precooled in liquid nitrogen, and stored at  80jC
(8). We used laser capture microdissection to collect 5,000
epithelial cells from histologically benign epithelial
glands and extracted RNA using a standardized protocol
(9). The RNA was subjected to linear amplification and
converted to cDNA for microarray hybridization as
previously described (7).

Gene Expression Analysis by Microarray Hybridiza-
tion. We prepared and hybridized spotted cDNA micro-
arrays as previously described (10), using RNA from a
single batch of reference standards for each hybridiza-
tion. Fluorescent array images were collected for both
Cy3 and Cy5 using a GenePix 4000B fluorescent scanner
(Axon Instruments), and GenePix Pro 4.1 software was
used to grid and extract image intensity data. Spots of
poor quality, as determined by visual inspection, were
removed from further analysis. To normalize log ratio
data, a print tip – specific Lowess curve was fit to the
log-intensity versus log-ratio plot, using 20.0% of the
data to calculate the fit at each point. This curve was used
to center the log-ratio for each spot. Data were filtered
to exclude poorly hybridized cDNAs by removing values
with average foreground minus background intensity
levels less than 300. We used the average of the two
duplicate cDNA spots on each microarray chip in sub-
sequent analyses. Data were filtered to include clones
returning data for at least 75% of the samples in both
preintervention and postintervention groups, which
reduced the initial list of 6,751 clones to 5,711 clones
and 5,643 clones in the low-fat/low-glycemic load and
the standard American diet groups, respectively.

Statistical and Pathway Analyses. We used the
significant analysis of microarrays algorithm5 to analyze
differences in transcript levels between preintervention
and postintervention specimens (11). Paired, two-sample
t tests were calculated for each transcript, and genes
differentially expressed were identified using false
discovery rates (FDR) ranging from 5% to 50%.

Quantitative Reverse Transcription-PCR. We used
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR to validate micro-
array results for selected genes. Primers specific for the
genes of interest were designed using the web-based
primer design service Primer3 provided by the White-
head Institute for Biomedical Research.6 We determined
acceptable performance characteristics of the PCR pri-
mers using normal human prostate cDNA, Biolase Taq
polymerase (Bioline Inc.), and the GeneAmp PCR system
9700 (Applied Biosystems) as previously described (8).

5 http://www-stat.stanford.edu/~tibs/SAM/
6 http://fokker.wi.mit.edu/cgi-bin/primer3/primer3_www.cgi

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16(10). October 2007

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2007 American Association for Cancer Research.

2152

The Influence of Diet on Prostate Gene Expression

Table 1. Postintervention dietary characteristics and intervention differences, by study arm

Group I: low-fat/low-glycemic diet (n = 4) Group II: standard American diet (n = 4)

P

Glycemic load
Calories
Fat (g)
Carbohydrates (g)
Protein (g)
% Calories from protein
Fiber (g)
Preintervention weight (kg)
Postintervention weight change (kg)

Mean (SD)

135 (6)

1,466 (367)
51 (36)
178 (12)
82 (11)
23 (3)
21 (4)
91.4 (20.1)
 5.3 (1.7)

*Test for difference in weight change between study groups, adjusted for baseline weight.

Mean (SD)

266 (37)
2,394 (215)

94 (8)
309 (47)
83 (13)
14 (3)
13 (4)

90.9 (12.8)
0.8 (4.5)

0.0004
0.004
0.06
0.002
0.9
0.007
0.02
0.97
0.02*

Total RNA from participant samples were reverse
transcribed, and cDNA was purified as previously
described. Relative quantification of gene expression by
quantitative PCR (40 cycles of 60jC annealing, 72jC
extension, and 95jC melting) was done on a 7700
Sequence Detector using SYBR Green Master mix and
gene-specific primers following the manufacturer’s rec-
ommendations.

Results

Participant Demographic and Clinical Characte-
ristics. Median participant age was 64 years (range,
59-69), median body mass index was 29 (range, 23-35),
median preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen was
5.2 ng/mL (range, 2.5-16.0), median prostate volume
was 50 mL (range, 35-149), and all but one participant
was Caucasian.

Intervention Effects on Diet and Weight. The
intervention resulted in profoundly different dietary

patterns in the two study arms (Table 1). Compared
with men in the standard American arm, participants in
the low-fat/low-glycemic load arm consumed 39% less
total energy, 46% less fat, 42% less carbohydrate, and
62% more fiber, and had a 51% lower glycemic load. The
intervention effect for weight, defined as the difference in
weight change between study arms adjusted for baseline
weight, was 6.1 kg (95% confidence interval, 1.6-10.5 kg;
P = 0.02).

Gene Expression Changes Associated with Dietary
Intervention. Table 2 gives the distributions of gene
expression differences in tissues obtained before and
after dietary intervention. Differences in these tables are
categorized symmetrically above and below zero in units
of log2. In both study arms, the relative difference in
expression of f95% of transcripts ranged between 0.67
and 1.49. In the standard American arm, expression of 20
transcripts decreased by 50% or greater, and 32 tran-
scripts increased by 100% or greater. In the low-fat/low-
glycemic load arm, expression of 9 transcripts decreased
by 50% or greater, and expression of 43 transcripts

Table 2. Distribution of preintervention and postintervention differences in transcript expression, and number of
significant differences at FDRs of 15%, 10%, and 5%, by treatment arm

Preintervention vs. postintervention difference

Significant differences

Absolute difference

(post/pre- log2)

Relative difference
(post/pre- ratio)

Standard

American arm
(5,643 transcripts)

Total

Low-fat/low-glycemic

load arm (5,711 transcripts)

Total

>+1.58

+(1.32-1.57)
+(1.00-1.31)
+(0.58-0.99)
+(0.00-0.57)
 (0.01-0.57)
 (0.58-0.99)

< 1.0

>+1.58

+(1.32-1.57)
+(1.00-1.31)
+(0.58-0.99)
+(0.00-0.57)
 (0.01-0.57)
 (0.58-0.99)

< 1.0

>3.0

2.50-2.99
2.00-2.49
1.50-1.99
1.00-1.49
0.67-0.99
0.50-0.66

<0.50

>3.0

2.50-2.99
2.00-2.49
1.50-1.99
1.00-1.49
0.67-0.99
0.50-0.66

<0.50

Total, n (%)

3 (0.05)
5 (0.09)
24 (0.43)
180 (3.19)
2,549 (45.17)
2,658 (47.10)
204 (3.62)
20 (0.35)
5,643 (100)

11 (0.19)
8 (0.14)
24 (0.42)
118 (2.07)
2,595 (45.4)
2,831 (49.6)
115 (2.01)
9 (0.16)
5,711 (100)

FDR < 15%

n (%)

FDR < 10%

n (%)

FDR < 5%

n (%)

0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)

11 (0.19)
5 (0.09)
3 (0.05)
1 (0.02)
0 (0)
0 (0)
3 (0.05)
7 (0.12)
30 (0.53)

0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)

10 (0.18)
4 (0.07)
2 (0.04)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
3 (0.05)
7 (0.12)
26 (0.46)

0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)

6 (0.11)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
3 (0.05)
7 (0.12)
16 (0.28)

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16(10). October 2007

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2007 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

2153

Figure 1. Differential gene expression of predietary versus postdietary intervention (low-fat/low-glycemic load, group I) specimens.
Paired two-sample t test results for presurgery versus postsurgery comparison. Twenty-six unique up-regulated genes with FDR V
10% are listed. Average relative expression, change from preintervention to postintervention.

increased by 100% of greater. None of the differences in
transcript expression in the standard American arm were
statistically significant, even using a FDR as high as
50%. In contrast, in the low-fat/low-glycemic load arm,
30 (0.53%) of the cDNAs using a criterion of a 15% FDR
and 16 (0.28%) of the cDNAs using a more conservative
criterion of a 5% FDR were statistically different.

Figure 1 shows the list of 23 unique genes that
showed significantly changed expression in the low-
fat/low-glycemic load arm. Several genes are related to
cell migration and tissue remodeling, including MMP7
(also called matrilysin), CXCR4, CXCL2, lumican, and
SPARC-like 1. Others are involved in intracellular signal
transduction, such as the immediate early response genes
2 and 3, the dual specificity phosphatase 1, and the v-ets
oncogene homologue. Expression of insulin-like growth
factor-II receptor transcripts increased, perhaps due to a
positive feedback of the low-glycemic load diet. Genes
that were down-regulated include prostate-specific
membrane antigen and peroxiredoxin 1, which may play
an antioxidant protective role in cells. We confirmed
these microarray results by quantitative reverse tran-
scription-PCR and found a correlation of 0.97.

Discussion

In this small randomized clinical trial, we showed the
feasibility of studying dietary effects on gene expression
using the preprostatectomy model. We collected both
pretreatment biopsies and posttreatment in situ biopsies,

and delivered an effective dietary intervention within the
weeks between diagnostic biopsy and surgery. We also
showed that tissue from a single prostate biopsy core,
weighing f3 to 5 mg, yielded adequate RNA, albeit after
a single round of amplification, for multiple analyses, in-
cluding cDNA microarrays and quantitative reverse tran-
scription-PCR. Lastly, we found that the intraindividual
variability in gene expression in tissues collected at two
time points is sufficiently small to allow the detection of
intervention effects. Much larger sample sizes are needed
to rigorously measure the reliability of transcript expres-
sion from prostate tissue collected at different times, but
these results are encouraging for future research examin-
ing the effects of short-term interventions on prostate
tissue.

The low-fat/low-glycemic load diet, and its associated
weight loss, was associated with multiple gene expres-
sion changes. Many of these changes could conceivably
alter the proliferation, metabolism, and redox potential of
prostate epithelial cells. For example, insulin-like growth
factor-I receptor binds both insulin-like growth factor-I
and -II, and the role of insulin-like growth factor-I recep-
tor in tumorigenesis and proliferation is well established
(8). We emphasize, however, that much larger samples
would be needed to make strong biological inferences
based on gene expression arrays.

The principal

limitation of this study is its small
sample size. We had little power to detect modest
changes in transcript expression. We also sampled only
f6,000 genes of the prostate tissue transcriptome, and
many additional genes that were not evaluated could be

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16(10). October 2007

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2007 American Association for Cancer Research.

2154

The Influence of Diet on Prostate Gene Expression

affected to an equal or greater extent. We also have not
determined whether the diet-associated changes in
transcript levels result in corresponding alterations in
the cognate proteins. Lastly, we limited our analyses to
the epithelial compartment, as prostate cancer arises
from the epithelium, however, there are many interac-
tions between the prostate stroma and epithelium
(12-14).

In summary, we conclude that the effect of complex
dietary changes on gene expression can be evaluated
within the preprostatectomy model. These results pro-
vide important information for future studies that aim to
examine the role of diet, obesity, and prostate carcino-
genesis and/or progression.

References
1. Meyer F, Bairati I, Shadmani R, et al. Dietary fat and prostate cancer

survival. Cancer Causes Control 1999;10:245 – 51.

2. Lee MM, Wang RT, Hsing AW, et al. Case-control study of diet
and prostate cancer in China. Cancer Causes Control 1998;9:
545 – 52.

3. Ramon JM, Bou R, Romea S, et al. Dietary fat intake and prostate
cancer risk: a case-control study in Spain. Cancer Causes Control
2000;11:679 – 85.

4. Ngo TH, Barnard RJ, Anton T, et al. Effect of isocaloric low-fat diet on
prostate cancer xenograft progression to androgen independence.
Cancer Res 2004;64:1252 – 4.

5. Ngo TH, Barnard RJ, Cohen P, et al. Effect of isocaloric low-fat diet
on human LAPC-4 prostate cancer xenografts in severe combined
immunodeficient mice and the insulin-like growth factor axis. Clin
Cancer Res 2003;9:2734 – 43.

6. Mukherjee P, Sotnikov AV, Mangian HJ, et al. Energy intake and
prostate tumor growth, angiogenesis, and vascular endothelial
growth factor expression. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999;91:512 – 23.

7. Lin DW, Coleman IM, Hawley S, et al.

Influence of surgical
manipulation on prostate gene expression: implications for molecu-
lar correlates of treatment effects and disease prognosis. J Clin Oncol
2006;24:3763 – 70.

8. Gennigens C, Menetrier-Caux C, Droz JP. Insulin-like growth factor
(IGF) family and prostate cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2006;58:
124 – 45.

9. Lin DW, Coleman I, Hawley S, et al. The influence of surgical
manipulation on prostate gene expression: implications for molecu-
lar correlates of treatment effects and disease prognosis. J Clin Oncol
2006;24:3763 – 70.

10. Moore S, Knudsen B, True LD, et al. Loss of stearoyl-CoA desaturase
expression is a frequent event in prostate carcinoma. Int J Cancer
2005;114:563 – 71.

11. Tusher VG, Tibshirani R, Chu G. Significance analysis of microarrays
applied to the ionizing radiation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2001;98:5116 – 21.
Joesting MS, Perrin S, Elenbaas B, et al. Identification of SFRP1 as a
candidate mediator of stromal-to-epithelial signaling in prostate
cancer. Cancer Res 2005;65:10423 – 30.

12.

13. Yang F, Tuxhorn JA, Ressler SJ, et al. Stromal expression of
connective tissue growth factor promotes angiogenesis and prostate
cancer tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 2005;65:8887 – 95.

14. Cunha GR, Hayward SW, Wang YZ, et al. Role of the stromal
microenvironment in carcinogenesis of the prostate. Int J Cancer
2003;107:1 – 10.

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16(10). October 2007

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2007 American Association for Cancer Research.

Low-Fat, Low-Glycemic Load Diet and Gene Expression in
Human Prostate Epithelium: A Feasibility Study of Using 
cDNA Microarrays to Assess the Response to Dietary
Intervention in Target Tissues
(cid:160) 
Daniel W. Lin, Marian L. Neuhouser, Jeannette M. Schenk, et al. 
(cid:160) 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev(cid:160)

2007;16:2150-2154. 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

Updated version
(cid:160) 

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/16/10/2150
 
(cid:160) 

Cited articles
(cid:160) 
Citing articles
(cid:160) 

This article cites 14 articles, 7 of which you can access for free at:
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/16/10/2150.full#ref-list-1
 
(cid:160) 
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
 
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/16/10/2150.full#related-urls
(cid:160) 

E-mail alerts
(cid:160) 
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
(cid:160) 
Permissions
(cid:160) 

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

pubs@aacr.org
.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at
(cid:160) 
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
.
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/16/10/2150
Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's
(CCC)
Rightslink site. 
(cid:160) 

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2007 American Association for Cancer Research.

 Determining the efficacy of dietary phytochemicals in cancer prevention 
 
Margaret M. Manson*, Bethany E. Foreman, Lynne M. Howells, Elena P. Moiseeva 
Cancer Biomarkers and Prevention Group, Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular 
Medicine, Biocentre, University of Leicester, LE1 7RH. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*corresponding author 
mmm2@le.ac.uk
 
 
Keywords: chemoprevention, biomarkers, indoles, polyphenols, tumour subtypes, plasma 
profiling 
 
Abbreviations: DIM – di-indolylmethane; EGCG – epigallocatechin-3-gallate; EGF – 
epidermal growth factor; EGFR – epidermal growth factor receptor; EMT - epithelial to 
mesenchymal transition; ER – oestrogen receptor; ESA – epithelial specific antigen; Her2 
– EGFR family member ErbB2; I3C – indole-3-carbinol; MS/MS - tandem mass 
spectrometry; SVM – support vector machine; uPA – urokinase plasminogen activator; 
VEGF – vascular endothelial growth factor  

 

1

 
Abstract 
Accumulating  data  suggest  that  dietary  phytochemicals  have  the  potential  to  moderate 
deregulated  signalling  or  reinstate  checkpoint  pathways  and  apoptosis  in  damaged  cells, 
while  having  minimal  impact  on  healthy  cells.    These  are  ideal  characteristics  for 
chemopreventive  and  combination  anti-cancer  strategies,  warranting  substantial  research 
effort  into  harnessing  the  biological  activities  of  these  agents  in  disease  prevention  and 
treatment.  However, this requires further investigation into their mode of action and novel 
approaches to the development of reliable biomarkers. 
Introduction 
Epidemiology indicates that the incidence of many common cancers is geographically and 
environmentally determined and that diets rich in fresh fruit and vegetables confer a lower 
risk of developing tumours in many target tissues.   Around one third of all cancers are 
thought to be related to unhealthy diet and therefore, in theory, preventable [1]. However, 
linking particular dietary components to prevention of specific cancers has proved to be a 
major challenge.  
Many  phytochemicals  of  differing  chemical  structure  have  anticarcinogenic  properties. 
They  activate  cytoprotective  enzymes  and  inhibit  DNA  damage  to  block  initiation  in 
healthy cells, or modulate cell signalling to eliminate unhealthy cells at later stages in the 
carcinogenic process.  In vitro data for several well-studied compounds indicate that each 
can  affect  many  aspects  of  cell  biochemistry,  but  different  agents  have  many  similar 
activities (Table 1).  Nevertheless effects can be cell-type specific, with transformed cells 
being particularly sensitive.  But despite the exponential increase in knowledge regarding 
mechanisms of action of these molecules, their success in clinical trials has been limited.  
In addition to the difficulties of long-term prevention trials in healthy populations, there are 
other reasons for this.  In cancer therapeutics, emphasis is increasingly placed on targeting 
tumour subtypes within a particular tissue, but this has not generally been considered for 
chemopreventive trials.  In many instances the crucial in vivo targets for particular dietary 
molecules are unknown, making it difficult to predict which cancer phenotypes are most 
likely to be affected.  Many phytochemicals are poorly bioavailable and evidence suggests 
that combinations may be more effective than single agents.  There may also be advantages 
in  combining  them  with  chemo-  or  radio-therapies.    Probably  the  greatest  hindrance  to 
more  successful  trials  is  the  lack  of  validated  biomarkers  of  efficacy.    To  enable  many 
more agents to be tested much more quickly, validated surrogate endpoint biomarkers are 

 

2

required, which will accurately determine outcome at a much earlier time in the process of 
tumour development.  
Identifying at risk individuals 
In order to optimise the chances of success in cancer chemoprevention trials, the ability to 
identify  those  individuals  most  likely  to  benefit  is  clearly  important  [2].    In  the  case  of 
primary  prevention  to  inhibit  the  earliest  stages  of  tumour  development,  selection  has 
traditionally  been  based  on  known  environmental  and  lifestyle  risk  factors,  genetic 
predisposition and family history.  But with such cohorts, obtaining definitive evidence to 
directly link exposure to a particular dietary agent with prevention of cancer in any target 
tissue is at best extremely challenging, at worst impossible.  In future it is possible that 
individuals suitable for primary prevention will be identified through screening for more 
common multiple susceptibility loci, such as those recently reported for breast cancer [3].   
Such loci together could inform on a substantial fraction of the genetic variance in some 
cancers. 
Patients can be recruited at later stages of the carcinogenic process.  Secondary prevention 
is  appropriate  for  those  who  have  already  developed  premalignant  lesions,  such  as 
intraepithelial  neoplasia  or  intestinal  polyps,  the  progress  of  which  can  be  monitored  in 
response  to  chemopreventive  treatments.    Several  dietary  compounds,  including  indoles 
and  polyphenols  have  shown  promise  in  this  respect,  with  regression  of  respiratory 
papillomatosis, cervical, vulvar and prostate intraepithelial neoplasia and oral leukoplakia 
[4-7].    However,  the  relationship  of  some  of  these  early  lesions  to  tumour  outcome  is 
uncertain.    Clearly  a  strategy  involving  susceptibility  loci  would  also  be  relevant  at  this 
stage, adding a degree of certainty to the prognosis. 
A  third  strategy  is  tertiary  prevention,  which  focuses  on  patients  who  have  been 
successfully  treated  for  a  primary  tumour,  in  order  to  inhibit  development  of  second 
primary tumours.  Greatest success to date in this respect has resulted from the use of drugs 
such as tamoxifen and its analogues for breast cancer, and retinoids for skin, head and neck 
and liver cancer [8].  If phytochemicals have a role at this stage, it is most likely to be as 
part of a combined therapy. 
Arguably a fourth category of patients who could benefit would be those with a superficial 
or  primary  tumour,  where  intervention  is  designed  to  prevent  invasion  and  metastases.  
While the cellular process of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is fundamental to 
morphogenesis,  when  reactivated  in  cancer,  it  facilitates  invasion  and  metastasis[9].  
Reversing this process could limit metastatic spread, achieving late-stage prevention with 

 

3

enhanced survival. Ability of chemopreventive agents to inhibit EMT or angiogenesis has 
been demonstrated in a number of animal models.  Use of phytochemicals for this purpose 
would be facilitated by knowledge of the characteristics within the primary tumour which 
predict invasive potential.  We previously showed that the polyphenol, curcumin, modifies 
the invasive potential of breast cancer cells[10].   Another polyphenol, epigallocatechin-3-
gallate  (EGCG),  was  found  to  inhibit  neovascularisation  in  the  chick  chorioallantoic 
membrane assay and when given in drinking water could significantly suppress vascular 
endothelial  growth  factor  (VEGF)-induced  corneal  neovascularisation  [11].  Such  results 
suggest  that  EGCG  may  be  a  useful  inhibitor  of  angiogenesis  in  vivo.    A  number  of 
phytochemicals also affect expression of cadherins, catenins and matrix metalloproteinases 
(Table  1),  and  prognostic  metastatic  biomarkers  for  breast  cancer,  such  as  urokinase 
plasminogen  activator,  uPA/PAI1  and  Her2  [12]  all  of  which  can  modulate  invasive 
capacity.     
Tumour subtypes 
A  key  aspect  of  targeted  therapies,  which  has  so  far  received  much  less  attention  in 
chemoprevention trials, is the concept of tumour subtypes.  Tumour development involves 
the accumulation of multiple mutations which differ from one tumour to the next in the 
same target tissue.  Such changes can be assessed using gene expression profiles to identify 
patterns of pathway deregulation which inform on disease prognosis and indicate treatment 
options [13].  Subtypes are perhaps best defined for the leukaemias [reviewed in 14] and in 
breast cancer, where at least 5 subtypes including luminal A (oestrogen receptor α (ERα)-
positive),  luminal  B  (ERα-positive),  basal-like  (ERα-negative,  Her2-negative,  cytokeratin  5/6-positive, 
and/or epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/Her1-positive), Her2 (Her2 amplicon-positive, 
ER-negative) and normal breast-like have been identified [15,16]. Such patterns in cancer cell 
lines have also been shown to be useful in predicting response to therapeutic agents [13, 
17,18].    However,  subtypes  identified  on  the  basis  of  gene  expression  profiles  do  not 
correspond  exactly  to  those  identified  by  immunohistochemistry  [19,20]  and  used  in 
clinical practice [21]. 
Additionally, gene signatures which predict the response to individual agents can be used 
in  combination 
  Dietary 
chemopreventive agents certainly exhibit cell-type specificity, but because of their broad 
ranging activity, they may be effective against different tumour subtypes.             Recent 
studies  show  that  indole-3-carbinol  (I3C)  induces  apoptosis  by  decreasing  expression  of 

the  efficacy  of  multidrug  regimes  [22]. 

to  predict 

 

 

4

genes essential for tumour cell viability, such as ERα and EGFR in breast cells of luminal 
A and basal-like subtypes [23,24] 
Molecular biomarkers 
There is no doubt that identification of reliable molecular markers, such as those in subtype 
molecular signatures, would be extremely advantageous to accurately predict efficacy of 
any intervention. Ideal markers should be indicative of early changes, relate directly to the 
carcinogenic  process  and  where  possible  allow 
invasive  assessment  of 
chemopreventive efficacy [25].  For some approaches, this requires a detailed knowledge 
of  not  only  the  stages  of  carcinogenesis  for  a  particular  tumour  subtype,  but  also  the 
mechanisms of action of the preventive agent.  Molecular biomarkers would be valuable as 
targets  to  identify  new  agents  or  to  optimise  lead  compounds;  as  risk  biomarkers  for 
selecting  suitable  cohorts  for  chemopreventive  trials;  or  as  indicators  of  efficacy  for 
determining response to mechanism-based interventions or identifying potential toxicity.   
There  is  no  shortage  of  candidate  proteins  related  to  oncogenic  processes  (drug 
metabolising  enzymes,  growth  factors,  transcription  factors,  cell  cycle  and  apoptosis 
related proteins) known to be aberrantly expressed in various tumours and modulated by 
phytochemicals in vitro (Table 1).  The philosophy of chemoprevention suggests long-term 
or  life-time  exposure  to  low  doses.    Therefore,  when  selecting  potential  biomarkers  of 
efficacy,  it  is  essential  to  ensure  that  they  are  modulated  under  appropriate  conditions.  
However, many of the in vitro mechanistic studies have been carried out with single high 
doses of chemopreventive agent that are not achievable in vivo.  Thus some of the reported 
effects may not be physiologically relevant. In order to better predict how phytochemicals 
may  act 
  Pharmacokinetic  and 
pharmacodynamic  studies  allow  estimates  of  plasma  and,  in  some  cases  tissue, 
concentrations  to  be  made.    Where  these  already  exist,  they  indicate  that  achievable 
concentrations are in the nanomolar, or at best, low micromolar range. In humans curcumin 
levels  are  typically  in  the  low  nanomolar  range,  although  ~10  μM  can  be  achieved  in 
colorectal tissue.  Resveratrol plasma concentrations of ~2μM appear typical [reviewed in 
26].  These low doses then need to be applied in cell culture studies over extended periods 
to better mimic in vivo exposure.  We exposed the metastatic breast line, MDA-MB231, to 
physiologically achievable concentrations of five agents in long-term culture and observed 
favourable  alterations  to  cell  cycle,  clonogenicity,  apoptosis  and  expression  of  several 
proteins associated with EMT (Moiseeva et al unpublished data).  Encouragingly, quite a 

in  humans,  several  approaches  are 

less 

required. 

 

5

few  published  studies,  in  which  single  treatments  with  physiological  concentrations  of 
dietary agents have been used in vitro, also reveal significant biological activity [reviewed 
in  26].    Additionally  a  number  of  phytochemical  effects  observed  in  vitro  have  been 
validated in animal models.   
       Monolayer cultures are unrepresentative of in vivo environments, so that models where 
cells  are  grown  on  relevant  substrata  like  collagen,  laminin  or  matrigel,  or  as  3-
dimensional spheroids may be more compatible with in vivo activity.  We found that breast 
cells  responded  differently  to  I3C  under  such  growing  conditions  [27].  In  3D  culture 
(collagen 1 or spheroids) the sensitivity of MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells 
towards I3C was increased.  In MDA-MB-468 cells the expression of the EGFR and β1-
integrin  was  modulated  by  3D  culture,  with  cells  responding  differently  to  EGF  or  the 
EGFR  inhibitor,  PD153035.      Phytochemical  effects  are  often  cell-type  specific  and  so 
different panels of biomarkers may be required for different target tissues, or for different 
cancer  subtypes  within  a  single  tissue.    On  the  other  hand  there  appears  to  be  a  certain 
degree  of  similarity  in  the  protein  targets  affected  by  a  variety  of  structurally  unrelated 
phytochemicals, suggesting similar mechanisms of action (Table 1).  
A  detailed  understanding  of  the  effects  of  dietary  agents  (for  example  on  growth  factor 
signalling,  EMT,  cell  cycle  arrest  and  apoptosis)  following  extended  treatment  at 
physiologically achievable doses, and related to target tissue and cancer subtype, will help 
to  identify  useful  biomarkers.    Such  an  understanding  would  include  identification  of 
primary targets of phytochemicals (particular proteins such as receptors, or more general 
effects such as endoplasmic reticulum stress or altered redox status), an appreciation as to 
why  healthy  cells  are  generally  more  resistant  and  comparison  of  in  vitro  with  in  vivo 
efficacy.   
Cancer-initiating stem cells 
An increasing number of studies are reporting the identification of a subset of cancer stem 
cells within a tumour, which are thought to be responsible for the highly aggressive nature 
of different cancers.  Breast cancer cells, grown in immune compromised mice, contained a 
subpopulation 
antigen 
(ESA)+CD44+CD24-/lowLineage-]. This subset maintained the ability to form new tumours 
[28 Al-Hajj].  Interestingly, the basal-like breast cancer subtype has similarity with breast 
stem  cells  [20,  29],  suggesting  the  “stem-like”  characteristics  of  this  subtype  may  be 
responsible for its aggressiveness and poor prognosis. Using a xenograft model of primary 
human pancreatic adenocarcinoma, Li et al [30] described a subpopulation of cancer cells 

surface  markers 

expressing 

cell 

[epithelial 

specific 

 

6

[expressing CD44, CD24 and ESA] that were 100-fold more tumorigenic than other cells 
from  the  same  tumours.    Similarly  O’Brien  et  al.,  [31]  identified  a  highly  tumorigenic 
subset of colon cancer cells positive for CD133 (1 colon cancer initiating cell per 5.7 x 104 
tumour  cells).    Clearly  if  biomarkers  can  be  used  reliably  to  identify  subsets  of  cancer 
initiating cells, it will be essential to determine the efficacy of treatments against these, in 
preference to other phenotypes within the tumour. 
Dietary agents in combined treatments 
Also of increasing importance is the investigation of combinations of phytochemicals, or 
their  use  in  conjunction  with  other  therapies,  to  increase  efficacy  or  decrease  unwanted 
side  effects  [26,  32].      We  have  shown  in  breast  cell  lines  that  I3C  exhibits  enhanced 
efficacy in combination with src or EGFR kinase inhibitors [24] and in vivo I3C prevented 
the  hepatotoxicity  of  trabectidin  (ET743),  an  experimental  anti-tumour  drug  with 
promising activity in sarcoma, breast and ovarian carcinomas, without compromising anti-
tumour efficacy [33].  Curcumin enhances the efficacy of oxaliplatin in both p53-positive and 
p53mutant  colon  cancer  cells  [34].    However,  caution  is  required,  since  it  has  also  been 
reported  to  compromise  the  efficacy  of  some  chemotherapeutic  drugs  in  human  breast 
cancer models [35]. 
Proteomics 
Methods which do not require a detailed knowledge of mechanisms, initially at least, offer 
an alternative approach to developing biomarkers and assessing chemopreventive efficacy. 
Mass  spectrometry  of  biological  samples  offers  a  powerful  proteomic  tool  for  the 
discovery  of  novel  biomarkers  and  for  profiling  [36].    Proteins  and  peptides  in  clinical 
samples reflect the intracellular activities of healthy and diseased tissue.  Plasma samples 
subjected to mass spectrometry can provide characteristic protein profiles, when over- and 
under-expressed peptides are determined by pattern comparison using a variety of machine 
learning  algorithms  [37-39].  This  technique  should  offer  the  possibility  of  monitoring 
plasma  profiles  in  at  risk  individuals  in  response  to  a  particular  treatment  regime.   
Development of these methods for cultured cells, would also provide the means to screen 
effects of chemopreventive agents – for example, to estimate the lowest concentration of 
agent  that  causes  a  change  in  profile;  to  look  for  dose-response  in  altered  peaks;  to 
compare  effects  of  one  agent  in  different  cell  types;  to  compare  the  signatures  between 
compounds  in  the  same  cell  type;  and  to  enable  identification  of  signature  peaks. 
Individual  proteins  can  be  identified  by  correlating  the  sequences  of  tryptic  peptides 
generated  by  tandem  mass  spectrometry  (MS/MS)  with  sequences  in  protein  databases. 

 

7

The  evolutionary  algorithms  with  support  vector  machine  (SVM)  supervised  learning 
enable  identification  of  biomarkers  with  the  highest  diagnostic  and  prognostic  potential. 
The effectiveness of combined treatments could also be explored. Nuclear fractions could 
provide enrichment for investigating changes in transcription factors and cell cycle-related 
proteins.    In  view  of  the  importance  of  protein  phosphorylation  in  proliferation, 
differentiation  and  apoptosis,  development  of  techniques  selective  for  phosphopeptides 
would provide added value [40, 41]. 
Conclusions 
In order to fully appreciate the potential for dietary compounds in cancer prevention and 
bridge the gap between apparent in vitro efficacy and clinical use, a number of  approaches 
are required.  Attention must be paid to the use of physiologically relevant concentrations, 
to  chronic  exposure  and  to  3D  cultures,  to  more  accurately  mimic  in  vivo  situations.  
Validation of potential mechanisms in appropriate animal models is also important.  The 
mechanistic biomarkers identified in vitro need to be verified in human tissues as being 
central  to  the  carcinogenic  process.    Finally  genomics  and  proteomics  approaches  offer 
novel ways of predicting clinical efficacy. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The  authors  are  grateful  to  Professor  Peter  Farmer  and  Dr  Don  Jones  for  critical 
discussion. 
 
References 
1. WCRF/AICR (1997) Food nutrition and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective. 
AICR Washington. 
2. Tsao, A.S., Kim, E.S. and Hong W.K. (2004) CA: Cancer J. Clin. 54, 150-180. 
3. Easton, D.F., Pooley, K.A., Dunning, A.M., Pharoah, P.D.P., Thompson, D., Ballinger, 
D.G. et al., (2007) Nature, on-line ahead of publication  
4. Rosen, C.A. and Bryson, P.C. (2004).  J. Voice 18, 248-53. 
5. Bell, M.C., Crowley-Nowick, P., Bradlow, H.L., Sepkovic, D.W., Schmidt-Grimminger, 
D., Howell, P., et al. (2000) Gynaecol. Oncol. 78, 123-129. 
6. Naik, R., Nixon, S., Lopes, A., Godfrey, K., Hatem, M.H. and  Monaghan, J.M.(2006) 
Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer  16, 786-790. 
7. Thomasset, S.C., Berry, D.B., Garcea, G.., Marczylo T., Steward, W.P. and Gescher, A.J. 
(2007)  Int. J. Cancer 120, 451-458  

 

8

8. Decensi, A. and Costa, A. (2000) Eur. J. Cancer 36, 694-709. 
9. Thiery JP (2002) Nature Rev. Cancer 2:442–454.  
10.  Squires  M.S.,  Hudson  E.A.,  Howells,  L.,  Sale,  S.,  Houghton  C.E.,  Jones  J.L.  et  al., 
(2003) Biochem. Pharmacol. 65, 361-376. 
11. Cao, Y. and Cao, R. (1999) Nature  398: 381. 
12. Weigelt, B., Peterse, J.L. and  van 't Veer, L.J. (2005). Nature Rev. Cancer 5, 591-602. 
13. Bild, A.H., Yao, G., Chang, J.T., Wang, Q., Potti, A, Chasse, D., et al., (2005) Nature 
439, 353-357   
14. Haferlach, T., Kohlmann, A., Bacher, U., Schnittger, S., Haferlach, C. and Kern, W. 
(2007)  Brit. J. Cancer 96, 535-540  
15. Sorlie, T. (2004) Eur. J. Cancer  40, 2667-2675. 
16. Yehiely, F.,  Moyano, J.V., Evans, J.R., Nielsen, T.O. and Cryns, V.L. (2006) Trends 
Mol. Med. 12, 537-544. 
17.  Van  Erk,  M.J.,  Krul,  C.A.M.,  Caldenhoven,  E.,  Stierum,  R.H.,  Peters,  W.H., 
Woutersen, R.A. et al., (2005) Eur. J. Cancer Prev. 14, 439-457 
18.  Neve,  R.M.,  Chin,  K.,  Fridlyand,  J.,  Yeh,  J.,  Baehner,  F.L.,  Fevr,  T.,  et  al.,  (2006) 
Cancer Cell 10, 515-527 
19. DiGiovanna, M.P., Stern, D.F., Edgerton, S.M., Whalen, S.G., Moore, D., 2nd and 
Thor, A.D. (2005). J. Clin. Oncol. 23, 1152-1160. 
20. Tsuda, H., Tani, Y., Weisenberger, J., Kitada, S., Hasegawa, T., Murata, T. et al. 
(2005). Cancer Sci. 96, 333-339. 
21. Ellis, I.O., Bartlett, J., Dowsett, M., Humphreys, S., Jasani, B., Miller, K.et al., (2004). 
J. Clin. Pathol. 57, 233-7. 
22.  Potti,  A.,  Dressman,  H.K.,  Bild,  A.,  Riedel,  R.F.  Chan,  G.,  Sayer,  R.,  et  al.,  (2006) 
Nature Med. 12, 1294-1300   
23. Sundar, S.N., Kerekatte, V., Equinozio, C.N., Doan, V.B., Bjeldanes, L.F., Firestone, 
G.L. (2006) Mol. Endocrinol.  20, 3070-82. 
24. Moiseeva, E.P., Heukers, R. and Manson, M.M. (2007) Carcinogenesis 28, 435-445 
25.  Kelloff,  G.J.,  Lippmann,  S.M.,  Dannenberg,  A.J.,  Sigman,  C.C.,  Pearce,  H.L.,  Reid   
B.J., et al., Clin. Cancer Res. 12, 3661-3697.   
26. Howells, L.M., Moiseeva, E.M., Neal, C.P., Foreman B.E., Andreadi, C.K., Sun, Y. et 
al., Acta  Pharma Sin (in press)   

 

9

27.  Moiseeva,  E.P.,  Howells,  L.M.,  Fox,  L.H.  and    Manson,  M.M.    (2006)  Indole-3-
carbinol-induced cell death in cancer cells is exacerbated in a 3D environment.  Apoptosis 
11, 799-812 
28.  Al-Hajj,  M.,  Wicha,  M.S.,  Benito-Hernandez,  A.,  Morrison,  S.J.  and  Clarke,  M.F.  
(2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 3983-3988. 

            29.  Asselin-Labat, M.L., Shackleton, M., Stingl, J., Vaillant, F., Forrest, N.C., Eaves, 

C.J.et al.,(2006). J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 98, 1011-1014. 
30.  Li,  C.,  Heidt,  D.G.,  Dalerba,  P.,  Burant,  C.F.,  Zhang,  L.,  Adsay,  V.,  et  al.  (2007) 
Cancer Res. 67, 1030-1037  
31. O’Brien, C.A., Pollett, A., Gallinger, S. and Dick, J.E. (2007) Nature 445, 106-110 
32. Sarkar, F.H., Li.,Y. (2006)  Cancer Res. 66, 3347-3350. 
 33. Donald, S., Verschoyle, R.D., Greaves, P., Colombo, T., Zucchetti,M., D’Incalci, M., 
et al., (2004)  Int. J. Cancer 111: 961-967  
34. Howells, L.M., Mitra, A. and Manson, M.M. (2007) Int. J. Cancer 121, 175-183 
35.  Somasundaram,  S.,  Edmund,  N.A.,  Moore,  D.T.,  Small,  G.W.,  Shi,  Y.Y.,  Orlowski, 
R.Z. (2002) Cancer Res., 62, 3868-3875. 
36. Marko-Varga, G., Lindberg, H., Lofdahl, C-C., Jonsson, P., Hansson, L., Dahlback, M. 
et al., (2005) J. Proteome Res. 4, 1200-1212 
37.  Petricoin,  E.F.,  Ardenkani,  A.M.,  Hitt,  B.A.,  Levine,  P.J.,  Fusaro,  V.A.,  Steinberg, 
S.M.,   et al., (2002) Lancet  359, 572-575. 
38.  Willingale,  R.,  Jones,  D.J.L.,  Lamb,  J.H.,  Quinn,  P.,  Farmer,  P.B.,  Ng,  L.L.  (2006) 
Proteomics 6, 5903-5914. 
39.  Honda,  K.,  Hayashida,  Y.,  Umaki,  T.,  Okusaka,  T.,  Kosuge,  T.,  Kikuchi,  S.  et  al., 
(2005) Cancer Res. 65, 10613-10622 
40. Bodenmillar, B., Mueller, L.N., Meuller M., Domon, B., and Aebersold, R., (2007) 
Nature Methods 4, 231-237 
41. Bose, R., Molina, H., Patterson, A.S., Bitok, J.K., Periaswamy, B., Bader, J.S. et al., 
(2006). Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U S A 103, 9773-9778. 
 

 

10

p21; p27; p38; p53; p70S6K; abl; AIF; pAkt; AP-1; ARNT; ATPase; Bad; Bax; Bcl-2; Bcl-
XL;  Bid;  BTG2;  E-cadherin;  cadherin-11;  caspase  3,  4,  8,  9;  β-catenin;  CD80/86;  cdc2; 
cdc25C;  cdc25B;  CHK2;  chymase  II;  collagenase; cyclin  A/B1/D1/E; cyt c; COX-2; DR5; 
EGFR; EIF2α; elastase; ELK1; Erg1; ERK1/2; FLIP; c-fos; GADD153/CHOP; GADD45; 
Gb3 synthase; GM-CSF; GRP78; HAT; HDAC; Her2; HIF-1; HO-1; hyaluronidase; IAP1/2; 
ICAM-1; IFNγ; IGF-1R; IκBα; IKK; IL2/6/8/10/12; iNOS; IRAK; IRF3; JAK1/2; JNK; c-
jun;  LOX;  MAPKAP-K1β;  MDM2;  MHC  class  II  antigens;  MMP2/3/9/13;    mTOR;  myc; 
MyD88; myeloperoxidase; Nag-1(PLAB); NF-κB; Notch1/3/4; Nrf2; ODC; PARP; PCNA; 
PERK; PGE; phase1/2 enzymes; PHK;  PKC; PPARγ; pRb; src; smac; STAT1/3; survivin; 
SYK;  TGFβ;  Th1;  thioredoxin  reductase;  TNFα;  TNFR1;  topoisomerase  II;  TRAIL;  α/β- 
tubulin;  VEGF; wee1; XIAP;  
 
p21; p27; p38; p53; p57; p70S6K;  pAkt;  AP-1; APAF1; ASK1;  ATM/ATR; Bad; Bak; 
Bax; Bcl-2; Bcl-xL;  Bid; caspase 2,3,8,9; E-cadherin; VE-cadherin; β-catenin; p300/CBP; 
cdc2; cdc25C; CDK2/4/6/7; CHK1/2; cyclin A/D1/D2/E/G; cdc42; COX1/2; cyt c; EGFR; 
ER;  ErbB3;    ERK;  FasL;  c-fos;  Fra1/2;  GADD153/CHOP;  GADD45a;  GJIC;  GSK3; 
H2A.X; Her2; HO-1; IAP1; IκBα; IKK; IL6/8; iNOS; JNK; c-jun; LOX; Mad21; MDM2; 
MMP2/9;  NF-κB; Nrf2; ODC; PI3K; phase1/2 enzymes; PHK; PIG7; PIG8; PIG10; PKC; 
PPARγ; PR; PTEN; pRb; SIRT1; Sp1; src; STAT3; survivin; TBK1; tensin; topoisomease 
II; TRAIL R; TRIF; VEGF; XIAP  
 
p16; p18; p21; p27; p38; p53; p130; p107; p70S6K;  pAkt;  AP-1; APAF1;  Bad; Bax; Bcl-
2;  Bcl-xL;  caspase  3,8,9;  DNMT;  E2F;  E-cadherin;  VE-cadherin;  β-catenin;  cdc2; 
CDK2/4/6; C/EBPα & β; COX2; cyclin A/B1/D1/E; cyt c; DP1/2; EGFR; Erg-1,  ERK1/2; 
Fas;  FasL;  bFGF;  FGFR;  fibrinogen;  fibronectin;  FKHR;  c-fos;  GADD153/CHOP; 
GADD45a; Her2;  hist-rich glycoprotein; HO-1; IκBα; IKK; IL6/8; iNOS; involucrin; JNK; 
c-jun;  lamin;  LOX;  67LR;    Mcl-1;MDM2;  MMP1/2/7/9/13/14;    NF-κB;  Nrf2;  ODC; 
PDGFR;  PGES-1;  PI3K;  phase1/2  enzymes;  PKA;    PKC;  PRAK;  RARβ;    pRb;  STAT3; 
survivin; telomerase; TIMP1; topoisomerase I;  VEGF; VEGFR; vimentin; XIAP  
 
p15; p16; p21; p27; p53; pAkt; ATM; Bad; Bax; Bcl-2; Bcl-xL; BCRP/ABCG2; BRCA1; 
E-cadherin; caspase 3,8,9; catenins; CDK2/4/6; CHK2; COX-2; CXCR4; cyclin D1/E; cyt 
c;  DR5;  EGFR;  ER;  Ets;  FLIP;  Her2;  IAP1/2;  IL6/8;  MDM2;  MMP2/9;  MUC1;  Nag-
1(PLAB);  NF-κB;  Nrf2;  ODC;  Pgp;  phase1/2  enzymes;  PI3K;  PTEN;  pRb;  Sp1;  src; 
STAT3; survivin; topoisomerase II; TRAF1; TRAIL R; uPA; VEGF; vimentin;  XIAP 
 
 p21; p27; p38; pAkt; AR; ATF2; ATF3; Bax; Bcl-2; Bcl-xL; Bid; BRCA1; E-cadherin; 
cadherin-11; N-cadherin; P-cadherin; caspase 3,6,7,8,9; β-catenin; cdc2; cdc25A; CDK2/4/6; 
CREB;  cyclin  D1;  cyt  c;  DR5; 
  EGFR;  ER;  ERK1/2;  Fas;  FLIP;  GADD45; 
GADD153/CHOP;  GRP78(BiP);  Her2;  IFNγ;  IFNγR1;  JNK;  c-jun;    MEK;  MHC-1; 
mitochondrial  H+  -ATPase;  MMP9;  Nag-1(PLAB);  NF-κB;  p56-/p69-  oligoadenylate  
synthases;    PCNA;  phase1/2  enzymes;  PI3K;  PSA;  Raf;  Ras-GTP;  smac/Diablo;  Sp1/3; 
STAT1/3/5; survivin; TGF-α; topoisomerases IIα/IIβ/I; α/β-tubulin; uPA; VEGF 
 

resveratrol  
(from 
red 
grapes, 
wine) 

EGCG 
(from green 
tea) 

I3C 
(cruciferous 
vegetables) 

DIM 
(cruciferous 
vegetables) 

 
Table 1 – Proteins modulated by dietary agents  
 
Dietary 
compound 
curcumin  
(from 
turmeric) 

Altered expression/activity 

 
The expression, phosphorylation, activity or binding of the proteins listed is affected by five of the 
best-studied dietary agents - data are taken from in vitro studies in many cell types, but the list is 
not comprehensive.  There are many mechanistic similarities between compounds of different 
chemical structures indicated in bold.  We apologise to all the authors for not citing the original 
references owing to space restrictions.  DIM – di-indolylmethane. 
 
 

 

11

Cancer Prevention Research

Biomarkers of Dietary Energy Restriction in Women at Increased
Risk of Breast Cancer

Kai Ren Ong,1 Andrew H. Sims,1 Michelle Harvie,2 Mary Chapman,2 Warwick B. Dunn,3 David Broadhurst,4
Royston Goodacre,4 Mary Wilson,2 Nicola Thomas,2 Robert B. Clarke1 and Anthony Howell2,5

Abstract

Dietary energy restriction (DER) reduces risk of spontaneous mammary cancer in rodents.
In humans, DER in premenopausal years seems to reduce risk of postmenopausal breast
cancer. Markers of DER are required to develop acceptable DER regimens for breast cancer
prevention. We therefore examined markers of DER in the breast, adipose tissue, and serum.
Nineteen overweight or obese women at moderately increased risk of breast cancer (life-
time risk, 1 in 6 to 1 in 3) ages between 35 and 45 were randomly allocated to DER [liquid
diet, 3,656 kJ/d (864 kcal/d); n = 10] or asked to continue their normal eating patterns (n = 9)
for one menstrual cycle. Biopsies of the breast and abdominal fat were taken before and
after the intervention. RNA was extracted from whole tissues and breast epithelium (by laser
capture microdissection) and hybridized to Affymetrix GeneChips. Longitudinal plasma and
urine samples were collected before and after intervention, and metabolic profiles were gen-
erated using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.

DER was associated with significant reductions in weight [−7.0 (±2.3) kg] and in alterations
of serum biomarkers of breast cancer risk (insulin, leptin, total and low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, and triglycerides). In both abdominal and breast tissues, as well as isolated
breast epithelial cells, genes involved in glycolytic and lipid synthesis pathways (including
stearoyl-CoA desaturase, fatty acid desaturase, and aldolase C) were significantly down-
regulated.

We conclude that reduced expressions of genes in the lipid metabolism and glycolytic
pathways are detectable in breast tissue following DER, and these may represent targets
for DER mimetics as effective chemoprophylactic agents.

Dietary energy restriction (DER) significantly reduces sponta-
neous mammary tumors in laboratory rodents irrespective of
the type of macronutrient restricted (1). Observational studies
indicate that weight loss in premenopausal or postmenopaus-
al women reduces the risk of postmenopausal breast cancer (2,
3). For example, in the Iowa Women's Health Study, women
who lost >5% of their body weight before menopause had
40% fewer breast cancers in the postmenopausal period com-
pared with women who continued to gain weight (2). Post-
menopausal weight loss of >10 kg reduced postmenopausal

breast cancer by 60% in the Nurses' Health Study, and >5%
postmenopausal weight loss in the Iowa Women's Health
Study was associated with a 25% reduction in risk (2, 3). Re-
duction in cancer risk is also seen after weight reduction after
bariatric surgery (4–7). DER is associated with diverse cellular
changes, including alteration of growth factor, signaling and
metabolic pathways, and reduction of cell proliferation (8,
9), in animal studies. DER favorably alters serum markers of
breast cancer risk, such as insulin, leptin, sex hormone binding
globulin (SHBG), and lipids, in women who are overweight or

Authors' Affiliations: 1Breast Biology Group, School of Cancer and Imaging
Sciences, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University of Manchester;
2Genesis Breast Cancer Prevention and Nightingale Centres, University
Hospital of South Manchester NHS Trust; 3Manchester Centre for Integrative
Systems Biology and 4School of Chemistry, The Manchester Interdisciplinary
Biocentre, The University of Manchester; 5Breakthrough Breast Cancer
Research Unit, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester, United Kingdom
Received 1/12/09; revised 5/18/09; accepted 6/3/09.

Grant support: Breakthrough Breast Cancer (K.R. Ong and A.H. Sims),
Genesis (M. Harvie), and Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council and Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(W.B.
Dunn, D. Broadhurst, and R. Goodacre). R.B. Clarke is a Breast Cancer
Campaign Research Fellow. Genesis provided funds for the Affymetrix
GeneChips.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Prevention

Research Online (http://cancerprevres.aacrjournals.org/).

K.R. Ong and A.H. Sims contributed equally to this work.
Current address for A.H. Sims: Applied Bioinformatics of Cancer, Break-
through Research Unit, Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, Crewe Road
South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, United Kingdom.

Requests for reprints: Robert B. Clarke, Breast Biology Group, School of Cancer
and Imaging Sciences, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, University of Manchester,
Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, United Kingdom. Phone: 44-1614463210;
Fax: 44-1614463109; E-mail: rclarke@picr.man.ac.uk or Anthony Howell, Breakthrough
Breast Cancer Research Unit, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Wilmslow Road,
Manchester M20 4BX, United Kingdom. E-mail: Maria.parker@christie.nhs.uk.

©2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0008

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

720

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

obese (10–13). A recent study reported changes in the urinary
and serum metabolome of long-term dietary-restricted dogs
(14). Several groups have assessed the effects of energy restric-
tion (1–3) and changes in macronutrient profiles (1, 3) on gene
expression in s.c. abdominal adipose tissue. These studies
were undertaken in obese men and women and were relative-
ly short-term studies with periods of energy restriction of be-
tween 2 and 28 days (2) or of 5 (1) and 10 weeks (3). However,
there has been, to our knowledge, no assessment of breast
gene expression in response to DER (15–18). Of the many gene
changes induced by DER, down-regulation of genes associat-
ed with fatty acid synthesis and desaturation is the most
prominent.

In the study reported here, we sought to assess whether ef-
fects of DER are apparent in breast tissue of overweight and
obese women at increased risk of breast cancer to begin to un-
derstand a possible molecular mechanism for DER in breast
cancer prevention.

Materials and Methods

Subject selection
Nineteen premenopausal overweight or obese [body mass index
(BMI) between 28 and 40 kg/m2] parous women ages between 35
and 45 y at increased risk of breast cancer (estimated lifetime risk, 1
in 6 to 1 in 3; ref. 19) were recruited from our Family History Clinic
and randomized to DER or to continue normal diet (Fig. 1). Other en-
try criteria included a normal mammogram within 24 mo, stable or
increasing weight, and sedentary lifestyle (not participating in >40
min of moderate activity per week). Exclusion criteria included al-
ready losing weight following restrictive diets; taking dietary supple-
ments; recent use of tamoxifen; regular use of anti-inflammatory,
anticoagulant, antiplatelet, or oral contraceptive medication; pregnant
or planning a pregnancy; previous hysterectomy; and serious comor-
bid conditions such as a previous diagnosis of cancer, diabetes, ische-
mic vascular disease, thyroid disease, or psychiatric disorders.
Seventy-eight volunteers were eligible but 59 decided not to partici-
pate, mainly after disliking a 2-d test diet or on learning the invasive-
ness of the protocol. Although the 59 nonparticipating women were
eligible in terms of weight and other criteria, it is unknown how they
compared with participating women for the other characteristics mea-
sured in Table 1. The study was reviewed by the Bolton (Lancashire)
Local Research Ethics Committee (Number 05/Q1409/42). All partici-
pants provided written informed consent before participation.

Study protocol
Breast and s.c. abdominal biopsies and fasting blood and urine
were collected in the follicular phase shortly after the beginning of
menses for two subsequent menstrual cycles to avoid widely fluctuat-
ing hormone levels producing confounding alterations in gene expres-
sion (20). Weight and total body fat (bioelectrical impedence, Tanita
TBF300a), waist, hip, and bust measurements were also measured
on this occasion. Three measurements of waist, hip, and bust size
were made using standardized methods to the nearest 1.00 mm,
and the mean of these measurements was used. Waist was measured
at the level of the umbilicus and hip at the widest point over the
tronchanters. Dietary intake and physical activity for 7 d before each
assessment were assessed from a 7-d diet history and physical activity
recall (21, 22). Energy and macronutrient intake of reported diets were
assessed using the five-diet analysis program (Compeat). After the
first biopsies, participants were randomized to either DER (n = 10)
or a control group (n = 9) who were advised to maintain their usual
eating and exercise pattern. DER consisted of four 325 mL cans of a
commercially available nutritionally complete milk shake (“Slimfast,”
Unilever) and 2 to 3 L of other clear low-energy, high-potassium fluids

Tissue Biomarkers of Energy Restriction

(water, black tea, coffee, low-calorie soft drinks, or stock-based
drinks). Overall, the diet provided on average 3,614 kJ/d (864 kcal/
d); 26% (58 g) of energy was from protein, 62% (97 g) from carbohy-
drate, 12% (26 g) from fat, and 7% (6.4 g) from saturated fat (Fig. 1).
Participants randomized to DER were monitored weekly by the study
dieticians to encourage good compliance, whereas those on their usual
diet were monitored after 2 wk to check that weight was being main-
tained.

Biopsy procedures
Breast. Recent craniocaudal and mediolateral oblique mammo-
grams of each participant were reviewed to assess the pattern of
breast tissue. Biopsies in women with a dense glandular breast pattern
were done under radiographic guidance (n = 7). A single-coned cra-
niocaudal mammogram of the breast was obtained at the time of bi-
opsy and done with the breast immobilized under the compression
device. In women with a diffusely fatty breast pattern (n = 12), biop-
sies were done without radiological guidance. After infiltration of 2%
lidocaine, a small incision was made in the skin at the biopsy site
through which a 14-gauge biopsy needle was inserted to a depth es-
timated by the operator. Between seven and nine biopsy samples were
obtained through the same skin incision, although the direction of the
needle was altered for each sample.

Abdominal fat. Three to five milliliters of s.c. abdominal adipose
tissue were obtained by suction biopsy under local anesthesia from
the anterior abdominal wall, midway between the anterior superior
iliac spine and the umbilicus. The first biopsies were taken from either
the left or right breast/abdominal side chosen by computer random-
ization (independently) and repeat biopsies on the opposite side to
eliminate gene expression changes due to the healing process. One
half of two separate breast cores were fixed in 4% formalin and em-
bedded in paraffin blocks; the remaining tissue was immediately snap
frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C.

Blood measures
Hormone, glucose, and lipid assays, which may be influenced by
DER, were undertaken at the Clinical Biochemistry Department of
South Manchester University Hospital Foundation Trust: glucose
(hexokinase/glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase method; Bayer Di-
agnostics), insulin [electrochemiluminescence immunoassay, Elecsys;
Roche Diagnostics; interassay coefficient of variation (CV), 10.6%], tes-
tosterone (chemiluminescence; Chiron Diagnostics; CV, 6.5%), and
SHBG (noncompetitive IRMA; IRMA-Orion Diagnostica; CV, 8.4%).
Fasting insulin and glucose were combined to calculate the insulin
sensitivity index using the homeostasis model assessment (23). Total
serum insulin-like growth factor-I (enzyme-labeled chemiluminescent
immunometric assay; Diagnostic Products Corp.; CV, 11.3%), serum
testosterone (chemiluminescence), and estradiol (electrochemilumi-
nescence immunoassay) were also measured. Colorimetric enzyme re-
actions were used to measure total cholesterol (CV, 3%), triglyceride
(CV, 5.4%; Bayer Diagnostics), and high-density lipoprotein cholester-
ol (CV, 7.1%; Randox); the levels were measured spectrophotometri-
cally by an automated Olympus AU600 analyzer. The adipokines
leptin and adiponectin and markers of inflammation high-sensitivity
C-reactive protein and sialic acid were determined at MRC Human
Nutrition Research Laboratory (Cambridge, United Kingdom). Plas-
ma leptin concentration was measured using an ELISA method
(Quantikine Human Leptin kit, R&D Systems; CV, 10%), whereas
plasma adiponectin was measured using RIA (LINCO Research,
Inc.; CV, 10%). Sialic acid was assayed using a colorimetric assay
(Roche Diagnostics; CV, 1.2%) adapted for use on the Hitachi 912 Clin-
ical Analyzer (Roche Diagnostics) and C-reactive protein using a high-
sensitivity, particle-enhanced turbidometric assay (CV, 4.5%; Dade
Behring). Serum and plasma samples were aliquoted, stored at −70°
C, and batched so that all samples from a participant were included
in the same assay (24). Laboratory personnel were blinded to the sam-
ple identity. Baseline age, BMI, and body fat and changes in weight,

www.aacrjournals.org

721

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Cancer Prevention Research

adiposity, diet and exercise parameters, and hormone and lipid levels
were compared between groups using the Mann-Whitney test using
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version 14 (SPSS, Inc.).

Metabolomics
Serum (in 200 μL aliquots) samples were added to an internal stan-
dard solution (0.174 mg.mL−1 succinic d4 acid, 0.172 mg.mL−1 glycine
d5, and 0.182 mg.mL−1 malonic d2 acid in water) and combined with
600 μL methanol, vortexed for 15 s, and centrifuged (15 min, 13,000 ×
g), and the supernatant was lyophilized (HETO VR MAXI vacuum
centrifuge attached to a HETO CT/DW 60E cooling trap; Thermo Life
Sciences). Urine samples were treated as for the serum, except 100 μL
urease solution (10 mg.mL−1) was added to 75 μL aliquots incubated
at 37°C for 30 min to enzymatically degrade urea and then combined
with 250 μL methanol. Lyophilized samples were chemically deriva-
tized in two stages. 50 μL of 20 mg/mL O-methylhydroxylamine so-
lution in pyridine were added and heated at 40°C for 90 min followed
by addition of 50 μL of N-acetyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroacetamide
and heating at 40°C for 90 min. A retention index solution was added
for chromatographic alignment (20 μL, 0.6 mg/mL C10/C12/C15/
C19/C22 n-alkanes in pyridine). Samples were subsequently analyzed
in a random order using gas chromatography-time of flight-mass
spectrometry (Agilent 6890 GC coupled to a LECO Pegasus III ToF
mass spectrometer) as described previously using optimized settings
for serum (25). Raw data were processed using LECO ChromaTof
v2.12 and its associated chromatographic deconvolution algorithm,
with the baseline set at 1.0, data point averaging of 3, and average
peak width of 2.5. A reference database was prepared, incorporating
the mass spectrum and retention index of all metabolite peaks de-
tected in a random selection of samples so to allow detection of all
metabolites present, whether expected or not expected from the study
of metabolic pathways. Each metabolite peak in the reference data-
base was searched for in each sample, and if matched (retention index
deviation, <±10; mass spectral match, >700), the peak area was re-
ported and the response ratio relative to the internal standard (peak
area-metabolite/peak area-succinic d4 acid internal standard) was cal-
culated. These data (matrix of N samples × P metabolite peaks) repre-
senting normalized peak lists were exported in ASCII format. The

serum and urine data (analyzed separately) were split into DER
and control groups for analysis with a two-sided paired Wilcoxon
signed rank test for each metabolite using the null hypothesis that
the difference (DER versus normal eating habits) in metabolite level
comes from a continuous, symmetrical distribution with a median
value of zero (26). Each significant (P < 0.05) metabolite was com-
pared with its receiver operating characteristic for differentiating
DER from controls.

RNA extraction
RNA was extracted from breast tissue using a protocol devised
by M. Dowsett and A. Kendall (27). Briefly, 20 to 50 mg of breast
tissue were ground to a fine powder under liquid nitrogen; RNA
was isolated with 600 μL of Qiazol reagent (Qiagen Ltd.), which
was passed through a commercially available RNA shearing de-
vice (QiaShredder, Qiagen); and 200 μL chloroform was added, in-
cubated at room temperature for 5 min, and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm
for 15 min. The aqueous phase was removed to a clean tube and
350 μL of 70% ethanol were added. The mixture was placed in an
RNeasy Micro column (Qiagen) and the protocol for the RNeasy Mi-
cro kit was followed to completion. Abdominal adipose tissue total
RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the
method described by Chomczynski and Sacchi (28). RNA samples
were purified using RNeasy Mini columns (Qiagen) according to
the manufacturer's protocols. RNA concentration and quality was
assessed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Tech-
nologies) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies).
All whole tissue samples yielded RNA in sufficient quantity and
quality for microarray analysis. Total RNA (2 μg) from abdominal
tissue was processed according to the standard Affymetrix protocol
for one-cycle target labeling to produce labeled cRNA. Total RNA
(10 ng) isolated from the breast tissue core biopsies was amplified
using a poly(A) PCR exponential amplification method based on
the techniques described by Brady et al. (29) and Iscove et al.
(30), which allow very small starting amounts of total RNA to be
used. Samples were then hybridized to HGU133 Plus2 GeneChips
(Affymetrix).

Fig. 1. Study design flowchart. Experimental design and sampling of the biopsies for the DER and control arms of the study.

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

722

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Table 1. Changes in body weight, BMI, adiposity, lipid, and hormone levels in DER and control groups over the
trial period

Baseline measurements*

Change at 1 mo*

P†

DER (n = 10)

Control (n = 9)

DER (n = 10)

Control (n = 9)

Tissue Biomarkers of Energy Restriction

Weight (kg)
BMI (kg/m2)
Body fat (kg)
Fat free mass (kg)
Body fat (%)
Waist size (cm)
Hip size (cm)
Bust size (cm)
Glucose (mmol/L)
Testosterone (nmol/L)
Estrogen (pmol/L)
SHBG (nmol/L)
Cholesterol (mmol/L)
Triglycerides (nmol/L)
HDL (mmol/L)
LDL (mmol/L)
Insulin (pmol/L)
Insulin sensitivity (μunit/mmol/L)
IGF-I (μg/L)
Leptin (ng/mL)
Adiponectin (μg/mL)
Sialic acid (mg/L)
Hs CRP (mg/L)

4.4 (4.0-5.4)
0.9 (±0.5)

4.8 (4.4-7.3)
0.9 (±0.3)

−7.0 (±2.3)
−2.5 (±0.8)
−4.6 (±1.5)
−2.4 (±1.3)
−1.9 (±1.2)
−6.6 (±6.0)
−5.8 (±2.6)
−4.1 (±2.6)
0.0 (±0.4)
0.0 (±−0.3)

93.3 (±10.5)
33.9 (±3.0)
41.2 (±6.5)
52.2 (±4.4)
44.0 (±2.3)
109.8 (±7.5)
117.1 (±6.4)
115.1 (±7.7)

91.9 (±13.2)
32.6 (±2.4)
40.7 (±9.0)
51.2 (±4.3)
43.8 (±3.4)
104.5 (±11.6)
115.0 (±8.6)
111.8 (±6.3)

0.3 (±1.5)
0.1 (±0.5)
1.0 (±1.4)
−0.4 (±0.9)
0.6 (±1.1)
3.6 (±5.6)
2.0 (±3.5)
1.0 (±1.4)
−0.1 (±1.2)
0.0 (±−0.3)

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.62
0.90
236.9 (124.0-1,265.0) 233.2 (138.0-996.0) −165.9 (−906.0 to 196.0) −96.7 (−664.0 to 458.0) 0.19
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.10
0.00
0.14
0.32
0.25
0.00
0.48
0.13
0.15

19.7 (±12.2)
−1.2 (±0.5)
−0.4 (±0.3)
−0.2 (±0.1)
−0.8 (±0.5)
−2.6 (−7.4 to 3.4)
−0.4 (−1.3 to 0.7)
−5.7 (±38.3)
−21.0 (±6.8)
−0.4 (±10.0)
−2.3 (±7.5)
−0.3 (−3.2 to 8.5)

36.2 (20-138)
5.5 (±0.7)
1.5 (±0.5)
1.4 (±0.2)
3.4 (±0.7)
8.1 (±3.1)
1.4 (0.5-2.4)

155.3 (±35.6)
33.1 (±10.2)
14.5 (±6.1)
73.7 (±5.3)
3.2 (±1.2)

38.5 (28-51)
4.8 (±0.9)
0.9 (±0.4)
1.6 (±0.3)
2.9 (±0.8)
8.3 (±3.3)
1.7 (1.0-4.8)

157.0 (±21.6)
26.9 (±13.0)
14.9 (±5.2)
72.1 (±8.3)
3.2 (±1.5)

0.3 (±5.1)
0.2 (±0.6)
0.1 (±0.5)
0.0 (±0.3)
0.2 (±0.5)

0.8 (−2.7 to 21.1)
0.1 (−2.2 to 6.24)

5.7 (±21.5)
0.9 (±7.9)
−4.3 (±9.9)
1.4 (±4.7)

−0.5 (−2.6 to 4.9)

Abbreviations: Hs CRP, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; IGF-I, insulin-like
growth factor-I.
*Mean (±SD) or geometric mean (range).
†P value for changes in parameters in the control group compared with changes in the DER group using Mann-Whitney test.

Laser capture microdissection
Before laser capture, frozen sections were fixed and areas of interest
were stained using the Arcturus Histogene frozen section staining kit
(KIT0401), as per manufacturer's instructions. The laser capture micro-
dissection was done on the Arcturus XT System. Microdissection was
done by laser pulses activating a thermoplastic polymer film attached
to an inverted CapSure “cap,” which then expands and surrounds the
cells of interest, allowing removal. Following cell capture, RNA was
extracted and isolated using the Arcturus PicoPure RNA isolation kit
(KIT0202) as per manufacturer's instructions. RNA was amplified us-
ing the Nugen WT-Ovation Pico System RNA amplification kit (Nu-
gen), labeled, and hybridized to Affymetrix U133 Plus2 GeneChips as
described in full on our Web site.6

Microarray analysis
After scanning, array images were assessed by eye to confirm scan-
ner alignment and the absence of significant bubbles or scratches on
the chip surface. Ratios (3′/5′) for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehy-
drogenase and β-actin were confirmed to be within acceptable limits
(0.86-1.38 and 0.70-1.24, respectively), and BioB spike controls were
found to be present on all chips, with BioC, BioD, and CreX also pres-

ent in increasing intensity. All microarray data are MIAME compliant
and accessible via MIAME VICE.7 Gene expression data were ana-
lyzed using packages within Bioconductor8 (31) implemented in the
R statistical programming language. The gene expression data were
normalized using the GeneChip Robust Multi-array Average algo-
rithm (32) within the “simpleaffy” package (33) and then compared
using multiclass significance analysis of microarrays (SAM; ref. 34) us-
ing the siggenes package. Baseline and repeat biopsies were paired
and analyzed in the DER group and control group separately. The
gene ontologies of significantly differentially expressed genes were ex-
amined using the GoMiner9 software (35).

Results

Ten women were randomized to DER, and 9 to their normal
diet (median ages, 42.4 and 41.8 years, respectively), and medi-
an study periods were 26.2 and 26.9 days for the DER and con-
trol groups (Fig. 1). No woman withdrew from the study at any
point. The biopsies were tolerated well, with no adverse side
effects other than bruising at both the breast and abdominal

6 http://bioinformatics.picr.man.ac.uk/mbcf/downloads/

7 http://bioinformatics.picr.man.ac.uk/vice/
8 http://www.bioconductor.org
9 http://discover.nci.nih.gov/gominer

www.aacrjournals.org

723

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

Downloaded from 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Cancer Research. 

Cancer Prevention Research

sites. The energy-restricted diet was well tolerated. The com-
monest side effects were constipation of variable degree (n =
6), eased in all cases by increasing intake of clear fluids, and
halitosis (n = 5), which resolved by improving oral hygiene
and was likely due to the thick texture and sugar content of
the drink. There were no significant differences at baseline
between the DER and control groups with respect to weight,
BMI, body fat, calorie intake, dietary macronutrient compo-
sition, serum hormones, glucose, or inflammatory markers
(Tables 1 and 2).

Change in anthropometry, hormones, and lipids
Compliance to the dietary regimens seemed to be good be-
cause all 10 women in the DER group lost weight (median loss
of −7.0, ±2.3); in contrast, women in the control group showed
minor fluctuations in weight with a median gain of 0.3 (±1.5).
Fat mass, fat free mass, waist, hip, and bust measurements de-
creased significantly in all of the women in the DER group;
there was no change in these parameters in the control group
(Table 1). As expected, the level of total and low-density lipo-
proteins, cholesterol, triglyceride, and leptin fell significantly
and SHBG rose significantly in the DER group (Table 1).
Women in both groups were sedentary and remained so
throughout the study (Table 2).

Metabolomics
Of the 253 derivatized metabolite peaks detected, 83 could
be definitively identified by matching the retention index
(±10) and mass spectral match (>700) of metabolite in sample
to an authentic metabolite standard analyzed on the same an-
alytic system. In addition, 49 were identified on a preliminary
basis by matching (match >700) of mass spectrum only to me-
tabolites present in available mass spectral libraries (NIST/
EPA/NIH02 library and the publicly available MPI-Golm li-
brary).10 The metabolites that were significantly changed in
plasma and urine for DER participants compared with con-
trols are illustrated in Fig. 2 and were consistent with known
effects of calorie restriction. A significant increase in glycolic
acid in urine correlates with the reduction in glycolytic genes
and increased lipid oxidation (Fig. 3). Increased urea and re-
duction in available amino acids, serine, and glycine in blood
is concordant with the breakdown of proteins due to calorie
restriction. There was also an increase in adipic acid and 3-
hydroxybutanoic acid in urine following DER, suggesting in-
creased lipid oxidation and the formation of ketone bodies.
Observations of participants, however, suggested they were
not ketotic, and the odor of ketones was not detectable on
their breath. The low-energy diet chosen in this study was
not expected to be ketogenic, containing 138 g/d of carbohy-
drates, which is far in excess of the minimum dietary intake of
50 g/d required to prevent ketosis (36).

Gene expression analyses
Microarrays were done on all breast and abdominal fat sam-
ples at time zero and after 1 month. In the control group, no
probe sets were found to be consistently differentially ex-
pressed between baseline and repeat biopsies in either breast
or abdominal adipose tissue using SAM software. Seventy-

two probe sets (representing 61 genes) were differentially ex-
pressed between baseline and repeat biopsies in the breast tis-
sue in the DER group [with a false discovery rate (FDR) of
0.38], whereas 200 probe sets (representing 161 genes) were
differentially expressed between baseline and repeat biopsies
in the abdominal adipose tissue in response to DER (with a
FDR of 0.01; full lists in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2).
Choosing a lower FDR for the breast tissue resulted in no
consistently significant genes being identified (due to greater
tissue heterogeneity); conversely, a higher FDR for the ab-
dominal tissue resulted in almost a quarter of the genes pres-
ent on the array to be called significant. To ensure that the
amplification step used for the breast tissue did not affect
our findings, we also amplified RNA from the abdominal ad-
ipose tissue from three participants before and after DER and
hybridized the samples to Affymetrix GeneChips; >90% of
the top 200 probe sets identified using SAM analysis re-
mained the same.

Many more genes were down-regulated than up-regulated
with DER (56 of 61 in the breast and 113 of 161 in adipose tis-
sue). Of the 61 genes significantly altered in the breast (Sup-
plementary Table S1), 11 were also significantly altered in
adipose tissue; several of these were represented by more than
one probe set, showing reproducibility, although P values
were lower for the abdominal tissue (Table 3). The most
down-regulated genes in the breast [stearoyl-CoA desaturase
(SCD), fatty acid desaturase 1 (FADS1), transferrin, and aldolase
C (ALDOC)] were among those shared with adipose tissue.
Other genes down-regulated in the breast were osteonidogen,
transmembrane protein 135, mitochondrial carrier triple repeat 1,
and hexokinase 2; the most down-regulated genes unique to ad-
ipose tissue were ELOVL family member 6 elongation of fatty
acids, secreted frizzled related protein2, cholesteryl ester transfer
protein, and plasma and collagen type II α1 (Table 3).

Gene ontology and pathway analysis
Genes differentially expressed in both breast and abdominal
tissue following DER were most frequently related to metab-
olism and energy pathways, with approximately one third of
gene ontology terms common to both tissues (Supplementary
Tables S3 and S4). Looking at genes within the highlighted
pathways using GenMAPP,11 it was clearly seen that almost
all the individual genes involved in the glycolysis, tricarbox-
ylic acid cycle, electron transport chain, and fatty acid metab-
olism were down-regulated in both adipose and breast tissue
following DER. Many of these genes were significantly differ-
entially expressed (P < 0.05). Several gluconeogenesis genes
were up-regulated and genes within the fatty acid β-oxidation
pathway were both up-regulated and down-regulated (sum-
marized in Fig. 3).

Expression of epithelial genes in the breast tissue
Epithelial-specific genes (keratin 14, keratin 18, CD24, and
SC38GB202) were expressed at high levels in all 38 breast sam-
ples but were low or not expressed in abdominal adipose tis-
sue (Fig. 4), suggesting that some epithelium was present in all
breast tissue hybridized to GeneChips. The expression of eight
epithelial genes was also assessed by quantitative reverse

10 http://csbdb.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/csbdb/dload/dl_msri.html

11 www.genmapp.org

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

724

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Tissue Biomarkers of Energy Restriction

Table 2. Dietary intake and physical activity in the DER and control groups at baseline and after the 1-mo trial
period

Measurements*

Baseline measurements*

Change at 1 mo*

P†

DER (n = 10)

Control (n = 9)

DER (n = 10)

Control (n = 9)

Energy

kJ
kcal

Protein (g)
Fat (g)
PUFA (g)
MUFA (g)
SFA (g)
Carbohydrates (g)
Fiber (g)
Alcohol (g)
% Energy from fat
% Energy from carbohydrate
% Energy from protein
% Energy from alcohol
Moderate activity, minutes/week (21)

9,778.5 (±2,158.5) 9,342.8 (±1,606.6)
2,339.4 (±516.4)
85.4 (±16.9)
93.7 (±26.6)
16.7 (±6.4)
30.6 (±9.9)
34.5 (±11.0)
291.2 (±78.6)
15.7 (±2.9)
10.8 (±11.2)
35.8 (±4.0)
46.5 (±6.6)
14.9 (±2.4)
3.2 (±3.0)
77 (±66)

2,235.1 (±384.3)
89.8 (±18.2)
84.0 (±17.5)
16.0 (±4.0)
27.8 (±6.9)
30.9 (±8.7)
272.2 (±67.9)
13.2 (±2.8)
14.2 (±9.8)
33.8 (±4.8)
45.6 (±6.8)
15.9 (±1.9)
4.3 (±2.6)
133 (±111)

−5,829.5 (±1,990.0)
−1,394.7 (±476.1)
−29.4 (±16.9)
−82.7 (±26.6)
−14.7 (±6.4)
−24.6 (±9.9)
−32.5 (±11.0)
−153.2 (±78.6)
3.9 (±2.9)
−10.8 (±11.2)
−24.8 (±4.0)
13.5 (±6.6)
11.1 (±2.4)
−3.2 (±3.0)
−19 (−120 to 0.0)

−230.0 (±1,374.1)
0.00
−55.0 (±328.7)
0.00
−3.1 (±12.5)
0.00
−3.2 (±17.2)
0.00
0.1 (±4.7)
0.00
1.0 (±5.8)
0.00
−2.3 (±8.9)
0.00
1.9 (±39.2)
0.00
−0.5 (±2.6)
0.01
−2.9 (±8.4)
0.09
−0.5 (±3.8)
0.00
1.3 (±4.0)
0.00
0.0 (±1.2)
0.00
−0.6 (±2.0)
0.00
−41 (−180 to 60) 0.63

Abbreviations: PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids; MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acids; SFA, saturated fatty acids.
*Mean (±SD or range).
†P value for changes in parameters in the control group compared with changes in the DER group using Mann-Whitney test.

transcription-PCR in the four quadrants of each breast from
four women undergoing bilateral risk reduction mastectomy.
Although there was some variation between sides, the differ-
ences between individuals were significantly greater, suggest-
ing relatively lower heterogeneity between contralateral
breasts in individuals (Supplementary Table S5).

Laser capture microdissection was then used to isolate
breast epithelial cells from fixed frozen tissue, and sufficient
RNA for GeneChip analysis was obtained from three matched
samples before and after DER. The majority of expression
changes for the highlighted DER genes were consistent be-
tween the microdissected epithelium and whole breast tissue
for this limited number of samples. Using the MAS5 normal-
ization method (37) to estimate whether particular probe sets
are expressed (called “present,” rather than absent), we deter-
mined that 93% (67 of 72) of the DER breast probe sets were
called present using MAS5 normalization in at least three of
the six microdissected samples. Just 2 of the 72 DER breast
probe sets representing ABCC6 and LOC389393 were not
called present in any of the epithelial-only samples (Supple-
mentary Table S1). Using the same method, we also confirmed
expression of >80% of the 72 DER breast genes in the ducts
and lobules of at least half of the normal breast tissue sam-
ples isolated by laser capture microdissection in a study pub-
lished by Turashvili et al. (Supplementary Table S1; ref. 38),
suggesting that DER-regulated genes are expressed in breast
epithelium.

Discussion

Because studies in rodents and observational studies in
women indicate that DER reduces the risk of mammary can-

cer, we designed the study reported here to determine poten-
tial biomarkers of the effect and effectiveness of DER in
women at increased risk of breast cancer (1–5). DER (∼60%
normal diet) was sufficient to favorably change known se-
rum/urine biomarkers of breast cancer risk (insulin, leptin,
and SHBG). Gene expression in breast tissue was also altered
following DER, with some changes consistent with those in
the adipose tissue. The metabolomic results seem to corrobo-
rate the changes in metabolic pathways seen at the gene ex-
pression level.

The tissue composition of the breast is variable and
changes with age and during pregnancy. In parous women
ages 35 to 45 years, it is estimated that the breast comprises
10% to 20% epithelium, with 60% to 80% fibroconnective
tissue and 10% to 20% adipose tissue (39, 40). The propor-
tion of adipose tissue is likely to be higher in overweight
and obese women, such as those who were eligible for this
study. It is not clear from our study whether the changes in
gene expression common to the breast and abdominal tissue
following DER affect the breast adipose tissue or breast ep-
ithelium directly. However, our limited laser capture micro-
dissection study of pure epithelium and analysis of the
RNA suggested a direct effect of DER on epithelial gene ex-
pression. A study of biopsies of normal breast tissue before
and after letrozole showed multiple gene changes, but these
investigators were also unable to distinguish between stro-
mal and epithelial changes because of paucity of the latter
(27). Further studies are required to establish tissue-specific
gene expression changes within the breast.

The four most down-regulated genes in the breast were also
down-regulated in abdominal adipose tissue, and three of the
genes were related to the metabolic pathways of fat synthesis

www.aacrjournals.org

725

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Cancer Prevention Research

(SCD and FADS) and glycolysis (ALDOC). SCD has been
shown to be a highly down-regulated gene in s.c. adipose tis-
sue in several DER studies (15, 16, 18). SCD is the gatekeeper
to the formation of unsaturated fatty acids because it intro-
duces a double bond in the 9 position in the saturated fatty

acids stearate and palmitate to form monounsaturated fatty
acids oleic and palmitooleic acids. SCD-deficient mice are lean
and have reduced lipid synthesis and enhanced lipid oxida-
tion and insulin sensitivity (41). SCD knockdown reduces pro-
liferation and Akt phosphorylation in cancer cell lines (42, 43).

Fig. 2. Metabolomic analysis of serum
(A) and urine (B) from DER and
control women. •, metabolites that are
significantly increased or decreased
(P < 0.05) following the diet compared
with the controls. Definitive metabolites
are shown in plain text, and preliminary or
unknown IDs are shown with an asterisk.
Up in DER, sample population mean is
higher after diet than before; Down in
DER, sample population mean is lower
after diet than before.

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

726

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Tissue Biomarkers of Energy Restriction

Fig. 3. Simplified representation of the glycolytic
and fatty acid synthesis pathways following DER.
Glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, electron
transport chain, and fatty acid synthesis were all
down-regulated (long dashes) and gluconeogenesis
was up-regulated (short dashes). Genes involved
with fatty acid β-oxidation were both up-regulated
and down-regulated. Italics, enzymes that were
down-regulated by SAM analysis in our study.
Superscript numbers represent the tissue in which
down-regulation occurred: 1, breast tissue; 2,
adipose tissue; 3, both.

Inhibition of SCD by stearic acid reduces N-nitrosomethylurea–
induced mammary tumor development in rats. A high unsat-
urated to saturated fat ratio in red cell membranes or serum
phospholipids (indicating low SCD activity) is associated with
reduced risk of breast cancer (44, 45). Thus, low SCD activity
in the breast may not only be a marker of the effectiveness of

DER but also an indicator of reduced risk of breast cancer and
a target for energy restriction mimetic agents (46).

We studied the effects of DER on a relatively homogenous
group of women who were all of similar weight and age
and were all parous. All biopsies, serum, and urine samples
were taken at about the same day of each menstrual cycle

Table 3. Genes that were significantly differentially expressed between baseline and second biopsies in the
DER group in both breast and adipose tissues using SAM analysis

Affymetrix
probe set

211708_s_at
211162_x_at
208964_s_at
208963_x_at
200831_s_at
214063_s_at
202022_at
204776_at
214033_at
202998_s_at
203435_s_at
223839_s_at
209600_s_at
229125_at
200832_s_at
202709_at

Gene
symbol

SCD
SCD
FADS1
FADS1
SCD
TF

ALDOC
THBS4
ABCC6
LOXL2
MME
SCD

ACOX1

ANKRD38

SCD
FMOD

Description

Fold change

P

Fold change

P

(breast)

(breast)

(adipose)

(adipose)

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (δ-9-desaturase)
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (δ-9-desaturase)

Fatty acid desaturase 1
Fatty acid desaturase 1

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (δ-9-desaturase)

Transferrin

Aldolase C, fructose-bisphosphate

Thrombospondin 4

ATP-binding cassette, subfamily C (CFTR/MRP) 6

Lysyl oxidase-like 2

Membrane metalloendopeptidase (CALLA, CD10)

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (δ-9-desaturase)

Acyl-coenzyme A oxidase 1, palmitoyl

Ankyrin repeat domain 38

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (δ-9-desaturase)

Fibromodulin

−16.7
−8.3
−3.7
−3.8
−4.2
−2.3
−2.3
−1.8
−1.8
−1.8
−1.6
−1.8
−1.6
−1.5
−1.7
−1.3

0.00002
0.00032
0.00072
0.00006
0.00284
0.00230
0.00015
0.00015
0.00018
0.00207
0.00003
0.00029
0.00039
0.00255
0.00020
0.00032

−4.3
−4.3
−2.2
−2.0
−3.2
−1.9
−2.3
−2.1
−1.6
−1.3
−1.7
−1.6
−1.5
−1.5
−2.1
−1.8

0.0000026
0.0000090
0.0000004
0.0000044
0.0000371
0.0000059
0.0000005
0.0000551
0.0000360
0.0000353
0.0000015
0.0000020
0.0000024
0.0000225
0.0000260
0.0000296

NOTE: Two hundred probe sets representing 161 genes were significantly differentially expressed between baseline and repeat biopsies in
the adipose tissue in response to DER with a FDR of 0.01. Seventy-two probe sets representing 61 genes were significantly differentially
expressed between baseline and repeat biopsies in the breast tissue in the DER group at a FDR of 0.38. Full lists of differentially expressed
genes in breast and adipose tissue are given in Supplementary Tables S5 and S6.

www.aacrjournals.org

727

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Cancer Prevention Research

Fig. 4. Changes in the level of gene expression of fat metabolism and epithelial-specific genes in adipose and breast tissue. Level of expression using MAS5
normalization. Before (left) and after (right) measurements are shown for each patient linked with a line. Open symbols, genes that are called “absent” or “marginal.”
Dashed line, the majority of genes with expression levels <100 are called absent.

under standardized, fasting conditions to limit variance. The
inclusion of a control group allowed us to assess any
changes in gene expression, which may be influenced by
the site or timing of biopsies. The lack of changes in gene
expression in the control group gives confidence that the
changes observed following DER are “real” and indicates
the stability of gene expression when diet and exercise are
unchanged. To maximize compliance and standardize die-
tary change, the DER comprised a liquid meal replacement
drink (Slimfast). The declines in body fat (−4.6 kg over 26
days) among the DER group are consistent with ∼1,400
kcal/d energy deficit, indicating good compliance to the
DER regimen (47). The clear effect of DER on body weight,
fat, and lipids and leptin confirms that compliance was at a
sufficient level to have metabolic effects and reflects the suc-
cess of our rigorous selection process. DER is well known to
cause declines in leptin (15) and SHBG (48). The decline in
total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycer-
ides is consistent with previous studies of low-fat, energy-
restricted regimens (49, 50).

The DER regimen used in our study reduced energy in-
take (67%) but also resulted in differential reduction of
macronutrients from the woman's standard diet of calories
from carbohydrate (53% reduced), protein (43% reduced),

and fat (89% reduced). It is possible that some of the changes
seen in this study were due to altered composition of the
diet, specifically the greatly decreased fat intake. It is known
that an isocaloric dietary change of macronutrients, such as
the combined requirement of carbohydrate and saturated fat
for induction of SCD in humans (18), can alter urinary me-
tabolomic patterns and gene expression in s.c. fat. However,
several studies show that DER produces changes in gene
expression, which are greater than changes in diet macronu-
trient composition (15–18). We believe that further metabolo-
mic studies are warranted to assess relative importance
between fat and carbohydrate to energy restriction. Some ob-
servational studies show a modest reduction of breast cancer
risk after reduction of fat intake, but a large randomized trial
of isocaloric fat reduction was not associated with risk reduc-
tion (51, 52).

Opposite breasts were sampled 1 month apart to circum-
vent potential inflammatory changes if biopsies had been tak-
en from one breast only. This is a potential weakness of the
study given the known heterogeneity of the breast and may
account for some of the changes seen. However, no consistent
differences in gene expression were seen in the controls in the
biopsies taken from contralateral breasts 1 month apart, and
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR assessment of eight

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

728

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

epithelial-specific genes from the four quadrants of each breast
from four women undergoing bilateral risk reduction mastec-
tomy suggested greater variation between individuals than
between breasts.

A higher FDR (0.3) was used to identify the most consistent-
ly changed genes in the breast tissue following DER compared
with the adipose tissue (0.01). We have postulated that is due
to greater heterogeneity of breast tissue compared with that of
the abdominal adipose. Alternatively, it could be an indication
that the response to DER in breast tissue is simply more var-
iable than the response in adipose tissue. Although the P va-
lues shown in Table 2 are not as low for the breast tissue as
they are for the adipose tissue, they are still highly significant.
Furthermore, gene ontology analysis identified many of the
same pathways for both tissues and almost all genes within
these were down-regulated (Supplementary Fig. S1). It would
be interesting to compare gene expression in breast adipo-
cytes, epithelium, and stroma separately; however, this ap-
proach would result in a much lower tissue to RNA yield
and therefore necessitate a more invasive biopsy technique.
However, we were able to do laser capture microdissection
of sufficient epithelium in three before and after DER samples
to obtain RNA and analyze gene expression. This revealed
similar changes in genes, such as SCD, to those seen in whole
tissue, suggesting that DER does affect breast epithelial gene
expression.

Previous studies have examined the effect of DER on s.c.
abdominal fat. Our findings are largely concordant with
those of other human studies. Notably, fatty acid synthesis
genes are down-regulated in the adipose tissue of both this
study (60% DER over 1 month) and the previous Affymetrix
array–based study of Dahlman et al. [30% DER over 10
weeks (15) and 50% DER over 5 weeks (18)], although this
article did not specify these specific metabolism genes. Other
studies have linked a 30% DER over 10 weeks with changes
in the expression of genes that encode transporters and tran-
scription factors linked to adipogenesis and mitochondrial
respiration (17). Clement et al. (53) reported that ∼60% of
genes differentially expressed in a 60% DER study over
1 month in s.c. adipose tissue were related to fat and carbo-
hydrate metabolism, although this group focused mainly on
inflammation-related genes. A recent study reported that ep-
ithelial cells from chemical-induced mammary adenocarcino-
mas from Sprague-Dawley rats had increased expression of
genes for glycolysis, decreased pyruvate dehydrogenase, and
increased lactate dehydrogenase compared with normal epi-
thelial cells, consistent with the Warburg effect (54). Howev-
er, this pattern of gene expression was not influenced by a
40% DER. The design of this study does not enable the ef-
fects of DER on spontaneous development of breast cancer
to be determined; furthermore, changes in lipid metabolism
were not reported (55). Adipocytes and breast epithelial cells
lie in close proximity to each other in breast tissue. Large
adipocytes in obese subjects may have dysregulated secre-
tion of factors (i.e., increased leptin and decreased adiponec-
tin), which may promote the proliferation of transformed
ductal carcinoma cells (56). DER resulted in significant re-
ductions in serum levels of leptin (66%) but no change in
serum adiponectin. Serum changes in leptin were not re-
flected in leptin gene expression. The dissociation between
adipokine gene expression and serum levels has been noted

Tissue Biomarkers of Energy Restriction

in earlier studies, suggesting a lack of sensitivity or post-
translational effects of DER (57). There have been few meta-
bolomic studies of DER in humans. We did not detect
significant changes in glycolysis (glucose-6-phosphate and
pyruvate) and tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolites (succinic
acid and 2-oxoglutaric acid) despite these pathways being
down-regulated at the gene expression level. However, the
small sample sizes would preclude the detection of small dif-
ferences in the concentrations of these metabolites.

The exact mechanism for the protective effect of DER
against cancer remains unknown. Increased glycolysis and
fatty acid synthesis is well described in tumors, and there
is renewed interest in inhibition of these pathways not only
for cancer treatment but also for prevention of cancer and
other diseases (see ref. 9 for review). For example, inhibition
of glycolysis with two deoxyglucose or fatty acid synthases
with a compound named C75 inhibits tumor growth in
rodent and human models (58, 59), whereas indirect obser-
vational evidence (increased stearic to oleic acid ratio in
RBCs) is consistent with SCD activity linked to breast cancer
risk (45).

This is a short-term study, and it is difficult to draw any
firm conclusions about the effects of long-term DER. It is un-
known which changes persist in the long-term when finally
a desirable weight is achieved and weight stabilizes. In com-
mon with our study, most previous reports have assessed
changes in gene expression during energy restriction and
the dynamic phase of weight loss (16, 53). One report finds
that most changes observed during dynamic phase of weight
loss were reversed or attenuated during a 5-week weight sta-
bilization phase (18). The beneficial changes in gene expres-
sion seen with weight loss are therefore mostly linked to
energy restriction. Periods of intermittent restriction may
thus be required to maintain these beneficial effects (10). En-
ergy restriction is known to reduce cell proliferation and
increase apoptotic rate in both normal tissues and cancers
(60–63). The inhibition of glycolysis has been shown to im-
pair the growth of tumor cells (64, 65), and suppression of
glycolysis and fatty acid synthesis specifically in the breast
epithelium may prevent breast carcinomas from developing
and progressing.

In summary, we have done the first DER study to character-
ize gene expression changes in premenopausal normal human
breast tissue. Common differentially expressed genes and
pathways in breast and abdominal tissue suggests that
short-term energy restriction may influence breast cancer risk
at the molecular level. We have identified targets that may re-
spond to chemoprophylactic mimetic agents.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments

We thank the participants for their invaluable contribution to this study;
Stuart Pepper and Yvonne Hey (Cancer Research UK Affymetrix core facility)
and Garry Ashton (PICR Histology Unit) for their excellent technical assistance;
Dr. Twani Tuthill (Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom) for
teaching K.R. Ong the adipose tissue biopsy technique; Rosemary Greenhalgh,
Jenny Affen, and radiographers at the Nightingale Centre for their assistance
with the biopsies; and Slimfast UK for their generous gift of the diet drinks.

www.aacrjournals.org

729

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Cancer Prevention Research

References
1. Dirx MJ, Zeegers MP, Dagnelie PC, van den
Bogaard T, van den Brandt PA. Energy restriction
and the risk of spontaneous mammary tumors in
mice: a meta-analysis. Int J Cancer 2003;106:
766–70.

2. Harvie M, Howell A, Vierkant RA, et al. Asso-
ciation of gain and loss of weight before and
after menopause with risk of postmenopausal
breast cancer in the Iowa women's health study.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14:
656–61.

3. Eliassen AH, Colditz GA, Rosner B, Willett WC,
Hankinson SE. Adult weight change and risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer. JAMA 2006;296:
193–201.

4. Sjostrom L, Narbro K, Sjostrom CD, et al. Effects
of bariatric surgery on mortality in Swedish obese
subjects. N Engl J Med 2007;357:741–52.

5. Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC, et al. Long-term
mortality after gastric bypass surgery. N Engl J Med
2007;357:753–61.

6. Adams TD, Stroup AM, Gress RE, et al. Cancer
incidence and mortality after gastric bypass sur-
gery. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009;17:796–802.

7. Christou NV, Lieberman M, Sampalis F, Sampalis
JS. Bariatric surgery reduces cancer risk in mor-
bidly obese patients. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2008;
4:691–5.

8. Dilova I, Easlon E, Lin SJ. Calorie restriction and
the nutrient sensing signaling pathways. Cell Mol
Life Sci 2007;64:752–67.

9. Howell A, Chapman M, Harvie M. Energy restric-
tion for breast cancer prevention. Recent Results
Cancer Res 2008;181:97–105.

10. Harvie M, Howell A. Energy balance adiposity
and breast cancer—energy restriction strategies
for breast cancer prevention. Obes Rev 2006;7:
33–47.

11. Pisani P. Hyper-insulinaemia and cancer, meta-
analyses of epidemiological studies. Arch Physiol
Biochem 2008;114:63–70.

12. Cirillo D, Rachiglio AM, la Montagna R, Giordano
A, Normanno N. Leptin signaling in breast cancer:
an overview. J Cell Biochem 2008;105:956–64.

13. Goodwin PJ, Boyd NF, Hanna W, et al. Elevated
levels of plasma triglycerides are associated with
histologically defined premenopausal breast cancer
risk. Nutr Cancer 1997;27:284–92.

14. Wang Y, Lawler D, Larson B, et al. Metabo-
nomic investigations of aging and caloric restric-
tion in a life-long dog study. J Proteome Res
2007;6:1846–54.

15. Dahlman I, Linder K, Arvidsson Nordstrom E,
et al. Changes in adipose tissue gene expression
with energy-restricted diets in obese women. Am
J Clin Nutr 2005;81:1275–85.

16. Capel F, Viguerie N, Vega N, et al. Contribution
of energy restriction and macronutrient composi-
tion to changes in adipose tissue gene expres-
sion during dietary weight-loss programs in
obese women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:
4315–22.

17. Viguerie N, Vidal H, Arner P, et al. Adipose tissue
gene expression in obese subjects during low-fat
and high-fat hypocaloric diets. Diabetologia 2005;
48:123–31.

18. Mangravite LM, Dawson K, Davis RR, Gregg JP,
Krauss RM. Fatty acid desaturase regulation in ad-
ipose tissue by dietary composition is independent
of weight loss and is correlated with the plasma
triacylglycerol response. Am J Clin Nutr 2007;86:
759–67.

19. Tyrer J, Duffy SW, Cuzick J. A breast cancer pre-
diction model incorporating familial and personal
risk factors. Stat Med 2004;23:1111–30.

20. Wilson CL, Sims AH, Howell A, Miller CJ, Clarke
RB. Effects of oestrogen on gene expression in ep-
ithelium and stroma of normal human breast tissue.
Endocr Relat Cancer 2006;13:617–28.

21. Sallis JF, Haskell WL, Wood PD, et al. Physical

activity assessment methodology in the Five-City
Project. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:91–106.

22. Black AE, Welch AA, Bingham SA. Validation of
dietary intakes measured by diet history against
24 h urinary nitrogen excretion and energy expen-
diture measured by the doubly-labelled water
method in middle-aged women. Br J Nutr 2000;
83:341–54.

23. Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS, Naylor
BA, Treacher DF, Turner RC. Homeostasis model
assessment: insulin resistance and β-cell function
from fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentra-
tions in man. Diabetologia 1985;28:412–9.

24. Tworoger SS, Yasui Y, Chang L, Stanczyk FZ,
McTiernan A. Specimen allocation in longitudinal
biomarker studies: controlling subject-specific ef-
fects by design. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
2004;13:1257–60.

25. O'Hagan S, Dunn WB, Brown M, Knowles JD,
Kell DB. Closed-loop, multiobjective optimization
of analytical instrumentation: gas chromatography/
time-of-flight mass spectrometry of the metabo-
lomes of human serum and of yeast fermentations.
Anal Chem 2005;77:290–303.

26. Broadhurst DI, Kell DB. Statistical strategies for
avoiding false discoveries in metabolomics and re-
lated experiments. Metabolomics 2006;2:171–96.
27. Kendall A, Anderson H, Dunbier AK, et al. Im-
pact of estrogen deprivation on gene expression
profiles of normal postmenopausal breast tissue
in vivo. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2008;
17:855–63.

28. Chomczynski P, Sacchi N. Single-step method of
RNA isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-
phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal Biochem 1987;
162:156–9.

29. Brady G, Barbara M, Iscove NN. Representative
in vitro cDNA amplification from individual hemato-
poietic cells and colonies. Methods Mol Cell Biol
1990;2:17–25.

30. Iscove NN, Barbara M, Gu M, Gibson M, Modi C,
Winegarden N. Representation is faithfully pre-
served in global cDNA amplified exponentially from
sub-picogram quantities of mRNA. Nat Biotechnol
2002;20:940–3.

31. Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, et al. Bio-
conductor: open software development for compu-
tational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol
2004;5:R80.

32. Wu Z, Irizarry RA. Preprocessing of oligonucleo-
tide array data. Nat Biotechnol 2004;22:656–8; au-
thor reply 658.

33. Wilson CL, Miller CJ. Simpleaffy: a BioConductor
package for Affymetrix Quality Control and data
analysis. Bioinformatics 2005;21:3683–5.

34. Tusher VG, Tibshirani R, Chu G. Significance
analysis of microarrays applied to the ionizing radi-
ation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:
5116–21.

35. Zeeberg BR, Feng W, Wang G, et al. GoMiner:
a resource for biological
interpretation of ge-
nomic and proteomic data. Genome Biol 2003;
4:R28.

36. Bravata DM, Sanders L, Huang J, et al. Efficacy
and safety of low-carbohydrate diets: a systematic
review. JAMA 2003;289:1837–50.

37. Pepper SD, Saunders EK, Edwards LE, Wilson
CL, Miller CJ. The utility of MAS5 expression sum-
mary and detection call algorithms. BMC Bioinfor-
matics 2007;8:273.

38. Turashvili G, Bouchal J, Baumforth K, et al. Novel
markers for differentiation of lobular and ductal in-
vasive breast carcinomas by laser microdissection
and microarray analysis. BMC Cancer 2007;7:55.

39. Hutson SW, Cowen PN, Bird CC. Morphometric
studies of age related changes in normal human
breast and their significance for evolution of mam-
mary cancer. J Clin Pathol 1985;38:281–7.

40. Blance RN, Sims AH, Anderson E, Howell A,
Clarke RB. Normal breast tissue implanted into

athymic nude mice identifies biomarkers of the
effects of human pregnancy levels of estrogen.
Cancer Prev Res 2009;2:257–64.

41. Flowers MT, Ntambi JM. Role of stearoyl-coen-
zyme A desaturase in regulating lipid metabolism.
Curr Opin Lipidol 2008;19:248–56.

42. Scaglia N, Igal RA. Inhibition of stearoyl-CoA de-
saturase 1 expression in human lung adenocarci-
noma cells impairs tumorigenesis. Int J Oncol
2008;33:839–50.

43. Scaglia N, Igal RA. Stearoyl-CoA desaturase is
involved in the control of proliferation, anchorage-
independent growth, and survival in human trans-
formed cells. J Biol Chem 2005;280:25339–49.

44. Chajes V, Hulten K, Van Kappel AL, et al. Fatty
acid composition in serum phospholipids and risk
of breast cancer: a prospective cohort study in
northern Sweden. Lipids 1999;34 Suppl:S113.

45. Pala V, Krogh V, Muti P, et al. Erythrocyte mem-
brane fatty acids and subsequent breast cancer: a
prospective Italian study. J Natl Cancer Inst 2001;
93:1088–95.

46. Liu G, Lynch JK, Freeman J, et al. Discovery of
potent, selective, orally bioavailable stearoyl-CoA
desaturase 1 inhibitors. J Med Chem 2007;50:
3086–100.

47. Redman LM, Heilbronn LK, Martin CK, Alfonso A,
Smith SR, Ravussin E. Effect of calorie restriction
with or without exercise on body composition and
fat distribution. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92:
865–72.

48. Akin F, Bastemir M, Kaptanoglu B. Relationship
between insulin and sex hormone-binding globulin
levels during weight loss in obese women. Ann Nutr
Metab 2007;51:557–62.

49. Thompson PD, Jeffery RW, Wing RR, Wood PD.
Unexpected decrease in plasma high density lipo-
protein cholesterol with weight loss. Am J Clin Nutr
1979;32:2016–21.

50. Raeini-Sarjaz M, Vanstone CA, Papamandjaris
AA, Wykes LJ, Jones PJH. Comparison of the ef-
fect of dietary fat restriction with that of energy re-
striction on human lipid metabolism. Am J Clin Nutr
2001;73:262–7.

51. Freedman LS, Kipnis V, Schatzkin A, Potischman
N. Methods of epidemiology: evaluating the fat-
breast cancer hypothesis-comparing dietary instru-
ments and other developments. Cancer J 2008;14:
69–74.

52. Prentice RL, Caan B, Chlebowski RT, et al. Low-
fat dietary pattern and risk of invasive breast can-
cer: the Women's Health Initiative Randomized
Controlled Dietary Modification Trial. JAMA 2006;
295:629–42.

53. Clement K, Viguerie N, Poitou C, et al. Weight
loss regulates inflammation-related genes in white
adipose tissue of obese subjects. FASEB J 2004;
18:1657–69.

54. Warburg O. The metabolism of tumours. London:

Constable and Company Ltd.; 1930.

55. Zhu Z, Jiang W, McGinley JN, Price JM, Gao B,
Thompson HJ. Effects of dietary energy restriction
on gene regulation in mammary epithelial cells.
Cancer Res 2007;67:12018–25.

56. Iyengar P, Combs TP, Shah SJ, et al. Adipocyte-
secreted factors synergistically promote mammary
tumorigenesis through induction of anti-apoptotic
transcriptional programs and proto-oncogene sta-
bilization. Oncogene 2003;22:6408–23.

57. Behre CJ, Gummesson A, Jernas M, et al. Disso-
ciation between adipose tissue expression and
serum levels of adiponectin during and after diet-
induced weight loss in obese subjects with and
without the metabolic syndrome. Metabolism 2007;
56:1022–8.

58. Jiang W, Zhu Z, Thompson HJ. Dietary energy
restriction modulates the activity of AMP-activated
protein kinase, Akt, and mammalian target of rapa-
mycin in mammary carcinomas, mammary gland,
and liver. Cancer Res 2008;68:5492–9.

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

730

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Tissue Biomarkers of Energy Restriction

59. Pizer ES, Thupari J, Han WF, et al. Malonyl-
coenzyme-A is a potential mediator of cytotoxi-
city induced by fatty-acid synthase inhibition in
human breast cancer cells and xenografts.
Cancer Res 2000;60:213–8.

60. Steinbach G, Heymsfield S, Olansen NE, Tighe A,
Holt PR. Effect of caloric restriction on colonic pro-
liferation in obese persons: implications for colon
cancer prevention. Cancer Res 1994;54:1194–7.

61. Zhu Z, Jiang W, Thompson HJ. Effect of energy

restriction on tissue size regulation during chemi-
cally induced mammary carcinogenesis. Carcino-
genesis 1999;20:1721–6.

62. James SJ, Muskhelishvili L, Gaylor DW, Turturro
A, Hart R. Upregulation of apoptosis with dietary
restriction: implications for carcinogenesis and ag-
ing. Environ Health Perspect 1998;106 Suppl 1:
307–12.

63. Hursting SD, Perkins SN, Phang JM. Calorie re-
striction delays spontaneous tumorigenesis in

p53-knockout transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1994;91:7036–40.

64. Boag JM, Beesley AH, Firth MJ, et al. Altered glu-
cose metabolism in childhood pre-B acute lympho-
blastic leukaemia. Leukemia 2006;20:1731–7.

65. Xu RH, Pelicano H, Zhou Y, et al. Inhibition of
glycolysis in cancer cells: a novel strategy to over-
come drug resistance associated with mitochon-
drial respiratory defect and hypoxia. Cancer Res
2005;65:613–21.

www.aacrjournals.org

731

Cancer Prev Res 2009;2(8) August 2009

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Biomarkers of Dietary Energy Restriction in Women at
Increased Risk of Breast Cancer
(cid:160) 
Kai Ren Ong, Andrew H. Sims, Michelle Harvie, et al. 
(cid:160) 
Cancer Prev Res(cid:160)

2009;2:720-731. 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

Updated version
(cid:160) 
Supplementary
Material
(cid:160) 

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/2/8/720
 
(cid:160) 
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2009/08/19/2.8.720.DC1
 
(cid:160) 

Cited articles
(cid:160) 
Citing articles
(cid:160) 

This article cites 64 articles, 19 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/2/8/720.full#ref-list-1
 
(cid:160) 
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
 
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/2/8/720.full#related-urls
(cid:160) 

E-mail alerts
(cid:160) 
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
(cid:160) 
Permissions
(cid:160) 

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

pubs@aacr.org
.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at
(cid:160) 
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
.
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/2/8/720
Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's (CCC)
Rightslink site. 
(cid:160) 

Downloaded from 

Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2009 American Association for

Nutrition and Cancer, 60(6), 744–756
Copyright © 2008, Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0163-5581 print / 1532-7914 online
DOI: 10.1080/01635580802192866

White Button Mushroom (AgaricusBisporus) Exhibits
Antiproliferative and Proapoptotic Properties and Inhibits
Prostate Tumor Growth in Athymic Mice

Lynn S. Adams, Sheryl Phung, Xiwei Wu, Lui Ki, and Shiuan Chen
Department of Surgical Research, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California, USA

White button mushrooms are a widely consumed food contain-
ing phytochemicals beneﬁcial to cancer prevention. The purpose
of this research was to evaluate the effects of white button mush-
room extract and its major component, conjugated linoleic acid
(CLA) on prostate cancer cell lines in vitro and mushroom extract
in vivo. In all cell lines tested, mushroom inhibited cell prolifer-
ation in a dose-dependent manner and induced apoptosis within
72 h of treatment. CLA inhibited proliferation in the prostate can-
cer cell lines in vitro. DU145 and PC3 prostate tumor size and
tumor cell proliferation were decreased in nude mice treated with
mushroom extract, whereas tumor cell apoptosis was increased
compared to pair-fed controls. Microarray analysis of tumors iden-
tiﬁed signiﬁcant changes in gene expression in the mushroom-fed
mice as compared to controls. Gene network analysis identiﬁed
alterations in networks involved in cell death, growth and prolif-
eration, lipid metabolism, the TCA cycle and immune response.
The data provided by this study illustrate the anticancer potential
of phytochemicals in mushroom extract both in vitro and in vivo
and supports the recommendation of white button mushroom as
a dietary component that may aid in the prevention of prostate
cancer in men.

BACKGROUND

The majority of common dietary constituents do not have
an acute biological effect immediately after ingestion. How-
ever, when eaten daily over a lifetime, subtle, long-term effects
may be observed. For this reason, cancer of the prostate, which
requires many years to develop, is a prime target for preven-
tion strategies utilizing daily factors such as dietary intake. It
is estimated that the time required for the clonal outgrowth of
a prostate cancer cell to develop into a 1 cm3 primary prostate
cancer would be 39.4 yr, with the mean age at diagnosis occur-
ring at 72 yr of age (1). Epidemiologic studies have suggested

Submitted 3 October 2007; accepted in ﬁnal form 28 January 2008.
Address correspondence to Shiuan Chen, 1500 East Duarte Road,
Duarte, CA 91010. Phone: 626-256-4673. Fax: 626-301-8972. E-mail:
schen@coh.org

that changes in lifestyle, including dietary modiﬁcations, could
prevent a signiﬁcant number of cancers (2–4). Of the environ-
mental factors that affect prostate cancer development, diet has
been identiﬁed as an important inﬂuence (5,6). Therefore, incor-
porating foods into the diet that are known to have chemopreven-
tive properties could reduce cancer incidence and subsequently
cancer-related deaths.

Several mushroom species such as Ganoderma lucidum,
Lentinus edodes, Grifola frondosa and Agaricus blazei have
been shown to exhibit anticancer effects such as the inhibition of
cell proliferation in prostate (7,8), colon (9–11), and breast can-
cer cell lines (10,12). Mechanisms attributed to the anticancer
activity of mushrooms include the induction of apoptosis; the
inhibition of angiogenesis and prosurvival signaling pathways
such as protein kinase B (AKT), extracellular-regulated
kinase (ERK), nuclear factor kappa-B (NF6-B) and activating
protein-1 (AP-1) (7,13,14) and modulation of the cell cycle
control protein retinoblastoma (pRb) (8). Although much study
has been completed on the medicinal varieties of mushroom
mentioned above, studies into the anticancer effects of the com-
mon white button mushroom (Agaricus bisporus) are limited.
Much of the research has focused on the anticancer effects
of carbohydrate fractions of this species. For example, lectins
isolated from the white button mushroom have been shown to
increase the sensitivity of lung, colon, and glioblastoma cancer
cells to chemotherapeutic drugs (15), inhibit colon cancer cell
proliferation (16), and enhance cellular antioxidant defense
mechanisms (17).

Previous studies in our laboratory investigated the antiaro-
matase activity of common vegetables that may suppress breast
cancer cell proliferation. Of the 7 vegetable extracts tested, the
extract of white button mushrooms was the most effective in-
hibitor of human placental aromatase activity (18). Our labora-
tory has focused on an ethyl acetate extract of the white button
mushroom, which contains mainly C-18 fatty acids and simple
organic and phenolic acids (19). We have previously reported
that this extract effectively decreased the proliferation of breast
cancer cells through the inhibition of aromatase enzyme activity.

744

WHITE BUTTON MUSHROOMS AND PROSTATE TUMOR GROWTH

745

We also identiﬁed CLA as a major component of the mushroom
extract and also an active inhibitor of breast cancer cell prolif-
eration and aromatase activity (18,19).

To determine the anticancer potential of mushroom extract
in prostate cancer cell lines, the current study investigated the in
vitro effects of this extract on the androgen sensitive LNCaP and
androgen insensitive PC3 and DU145 prostate cancer cell lines.
We also studied the in vivo chemopreventive potential of mush-
room extract in two separate studies utilizing male athymic mice
injected with either DU145 or PC3 prostate cancer cell lines.
The information gained from this study gives us future direc-
tion for investigation into the active ingredients of mushrooms
as well as their mechanisms and to the overall understanding
of how inclusion of mushrooms into the diet may contribute to
more effective prostate cancer prevention strategies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell Culture

LNCaP, PC3, and DU145 cell lines were obtained from
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD) and
grown in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal bovine serum in the
presence of 100 U/ml penicillin and 0.1 g/l streptomycin. Cells
◦
C with 95% air and 5% carbon dioxide.
were incubated at 37
All cells were kept below passage 20 and used in experiments
during the linear phase of growth.

Production of Mushroom Extract

Mushroom extract was produced by chopping 60 g of fresh
white button mushroom (Agaricus bisporus) and boiling it in
water. The broth was ﬁltered and then applied to 5 g/60 ml
capacity polyamide columns (Discovery DPA-6S SPE; Supelco,
Bellefonte, PA). Fractions were eluted by a step gradient (50
ml of each step) of increasing methanol to water. The 20%
methanol–water fraction was rotor evaporated to dryness and
then redissolved in 1 ml of water to produce the 6× mushroom
extract. Therefore, 6 g of mushroom can produce 100 µl of 6 ×
fraction.

Real-Time Proliferation Assay

Cells were plated in 16 well plates at a density of 10,000 cells/
well and treated with either medium containing ethanol as ve-
hicle control (<0.1% total) or CLA (Cayman Chemical, Ann
Arbor, MI; 0–200 µM). Cell growth was monitored automat-
ically via the ACEA RT-CES real-time proliferation machine
(ACEA Biosciences, Inc., San Diego, CA), which swept the
plates once an hour for up to 96 h. The machine measures elec-
trical impedance through sensors on the bottom of the 16 well
plates. Increase in impedance correlates with an increase in cell
density. Media and treatments were changed after 48 h. Data are
expressed as ratio of treated to untreated cells mean ± SE for 3
replications.

Apoptosis ELISA

Apoptosis was assessed utilizing the Cell Death Detection
ELISAPLUS Assay (Boehringer Mannheim, Indianapolis, IN).
This assay is a photometric enzyme-linked immunoassay that
quantitatively measures the internucleosomal degradation of
DNA, which occurs during apoptosis. The assay is a quanti-
tative sandwich-enzyme-immunoassay utilizing monoclonal
mouse antibodies directed against DNA and histones that
detect speciﬁcally mononucleosomes and oligonucleosomes.
Quantitative measurement of the amount of internucleosomal
degradation is measured photometrically at 405 nm with ABTS
as substrate. Cells were plated in 60 mm dishes (Falcon, BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA) at a density of 100,000 cells/dish
and allowed to attach for 24 h. Cells were treated with media
control (mushroom extract is water soluble) or mushroom
extract at a concentration of 20 µl/ml for 48 and 72 h. Following
treatments, nonadherent cells were collected and pelleted at
200 g for 10 min. The supernatant was discarded; the cell pellet
was washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 137
mmol/l sodium chloride, 1.5 mmol/l potassium phosphate, 7.2
mmol/l sodium phosphate, 2.7 mmol/l potassium chloride, pH
7.4) and recentrifuged. Adherent cells were washed with cold
PBS, trypsinized, collected, and combined with nonadherent
cells. Both live and dead cells were then counted via Trypan
Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) exclusion, and 10,000 cells were
added to the microtiter plate for all treatment groups; and
apoptosis assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Absorbance was read on a SpectraMax M5
plate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) at 405 nm.
Background values were subtracted from readings (media plus
reagent, no cells) and expressed as absorbance of dye bound to
antibodies bound to mononucleosomes and oligonucleosomes
at 405 nm of each treated sample divided by media controls.

Annexin V Assay

Cells were plated in 100 mm dishes (Falcon, BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA) at a density of 50,000 cells/dish and allowed to
attach for 72 h. Cells were treated with media control (mushroom
extract is water soluble) or mushroom extract at a concentration
of 20 µl/ml for 48 and 72 h. Following treatments, adherent
cells were trypsinized, nonadherent cells were collected, and
all cells were pelleted at 200 g for 10 min and then washed
twice with cold 1 × PBS and resuspended in 1 ml of 1 ×
binding buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl,
2.5 mM CaCl2) at a concentration of 1 × 106 cells/ml. 1 × 105
cells were stained with Annexin V-FITC; BD Pharmingen, San
Jose, CA) and propidium iodide (PI; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. After adding
400 ml of 1 × binding buffer to each tube, cells were analyzed
by ﬂow cytometry within 1 h on a CyAnTM ADP 9color-UV
ﬂow cytometer(Dako, Inc., Carpinteria, CA). Controls included
unstained cells, cells stained with Annexin V-FITC only, and
cells stained with PI only.

746

Animal Experiments

Five-week-old, male BALB/c Nu-Nu, athymic mice were
purchased (Charles River Laboratories). Mice were randomly
divided into 6 groups with 8 mice per group. At 6 wk of age,
mice were gavage fed with either 100 µl water control or 100 µl
mushroom extract (in water). The third group was gavaged with
100 µl water and pair fed to the 6X mushroom group (the
food consumed by the 6X mushroom group was weighed and
the same amount provided to the pair-fed group) to control
for differences in caloric intake. Each animal received daily
gavage treatment for the duration of the experiment. At 7 wk
of age, mice were given two subcutaneous injections of either
DU145 or PC3 cells in Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose,
CA). These cells were grown in RPMI 1640 with nonessential
amino acids, sodium pyruvate, and Earle’s salts in 10% fetal calf
serum. The cells were harvested and resuspended in an equal
volume of Matrigel (BD Biosciences) to a ﬁnal concentration of
1 × 107 cells/0.2 ml. Body weights were monitored weekly as
an indicator of the animal’s overall health. At the end of 7 wk
of gavage treatment, mice were euthanized; blood samples were
collected; and tumors were removed, weighed, and sent for
hematoxilin and eosin (H & E) histological staining through
the City of Hope Pathology Department Core Facility. Tumor
specimens were also stained using cleaved-caspase-3 antibody
(Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) for apoptosis and
Ki-67 antibody (Dakocytomation, Carpinteria, CA) staining for
cell proliferation by the City of Hope Pathology Department
Core Facility. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n ≥ 5).

Microarray Analysis

For microarray analysis, total RNA was extracted from 3
DU145-derived tumors from each treatment group using TRI-
zol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Synthesis and labeling
of cRNA targets, hybridization of GeneChips, and signal de-
tection were carried out by the Microarray Core Facility at the
City of Hope. Brieﬂy, biotinylated cRNA was generated using
5 µg total RNA using T7 RNA polymerase. The Affymetrix
GeneChip Human Genome U133A v2.0 array (HGU133A2)
(Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) was used to deﬁne gene expres-
sion proﬁles from tumor samples. For microarray hybridization,
the GeneChip arrays were hybridized with 15 µg of fragmented
cRNA targets and then washed. The staining was performed with
streptavidin-PE. Affymetrix GeneChip images were scanned at
11-µm resolution using a high resolution GeneChip Scanner
3000 (Hewlett-Packard).

Statistical Processing of Microarray Data

Quality assessment and statistical analysis of gene expression
data was performed using the R/Bioconductor packages. To en-
sure the high quality of the microarray process, a set of quality
assessment steps implemented in Bioconductor package “Affy-
Express” were applied to the data. Raw intensity measurements

L. S. ADAMS ET AL.

of all probe sets were converted into expression measurements
using the “GCRMA” package. The “LIMMA” package was
then used to identify the genes differentially expressed between
mushroom-fed and water-fed samples. The genes showing al-
tered expression were categorized on the basis of their cellular
components, biological processes, molecular functions, and sig-
nal pathways using the Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (Ingenuity,
Mountain View, CA) software. Signiﬁcant genes were selected
with a cutoff of P < 0.01 and log2 ratio of 1 (twofold change).

Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)

IPA is a Web-based software program that identiﬁes the bio-
logical functions, pathways, and mechanisms most relevant to a
given data set of genes. Information on individual genes is drawn
from a large knowledge base of biological networks created
from millions of publications (full-text articles published in sci-
entiﬁc journals), and the networks are drawn by the Functional
Analysis feature of IPA based on the connectivity of the genes.

Real-Time PCR

(cid:3)
and 5

(cid:3)
and 5

Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) was used for total RNA isolation.
SYBR Green Supermix and iScript cDNA Synthesis kit
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) were used for cDNA preparation.
(cid:3)
GCCGACAAAA-
PCR primers for KIT were as follows: 5
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
CCTTTGCCACCTGGTAAGAA3
;
GGAGATCTGT3
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
TCCTGA
CCGCTG-AAGTAAACCAGGAT3
for FH, 5
(cid:3)
ATC-AAGGAATGCA
TCCAGTCTGCCATA3
(cid:3)
CACTCACC3
control),
for
as
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
and 5
CCTGC
5
(cid:3)
. Reactions were run in
TTCGTGATCC-ACATCTGCTG3
triplicate on the iCycler iQ5 Real-Time PCR Detection System
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and results were analyzed with the
software provided.

(cid:3)
AGAAGGAGATCACTGCCC-TGGCACC3

(cid:3)
and 5
β-actin

(cid:3)
GGTTGGAGATTCAT-GAGAACC3

;

an

internal

(cid:3)
for FAS, 5

;

human

(used

Statistical Analysis

To assess statistical signiﬁcance, values were compared to
controls with either Student’s t-test or 1-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), followed by Dunnett’s Multiple Range test (α =
0.05) or 2-way ANOVA as appropriate using Prism GraphPad 4
software (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA).

RESULTS

Effects of Mushroom Extract on Prostate Cancer Cell
Proliferation

The antiproliferative activity of mushroom extract was as-
sessed in the LNCaP, DU145, and PC3 prostate cancer cell lines.
Cells were treated with mushroom extract (20 µl/ml) for 96 h.
Results from this assay showed that exposure to mushroom ex-
tract resulted in a signiﬁcant, dose-dependent inhibition of cell
proliferation (P ≤ 0.01) in all cell lines tested. The magnitude

WHITE BUTTON MUSHROOMS AND PROSTATE TUMOR GROWTH

747

A 

)
x
e
d
n

I
 
l
l

e
C

(
 
n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

0

7.5

B 

*
50
Time (hours)

25

*

75

x
e
d
n

I
 
l
l
e
C

5.0

2.5

0.0

0

)
x
e
d
n

I
 
l
l

e
C

(
 
n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0

*

*

25

50

75

100

125

Time (hours)

C 

*

*

75

*

25

50
Time (hours)

Media
10ul/mL
20ul/mL

Media
10ul/mL
20ul/mL

A 

s

i

s
o
t
p
o
p
A

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
o
t
 
o

 

i
t
a
r
(

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

B 

s
i
s
o
t
p
o
p
A

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
o
t
 
o

i
t
a
r
(

5

4

3

2

1

0

*

Media
Mushroom

LNCap

PC3

Cell Line

DU145

*

Media
Mushroom

*

PC3

DU145

Cell  Line

Media
10ul/mL
20ul/mL

FIG. 2. Mushroom extract induces DNA fragmentation in prostate cell lines.
Cells were exposed to mushroom extract (20 µl/ml) for 48 h (A) or 72 h (B),
harvested, and analyzed using the Cell Death Detection PLUS Assay. Values are
means ± SE, n = 3. Data are expressed as absorbance at 405 nm of each treated
sample divided by vehicle controls. * indicates a signiﬁcant difference (P ≤
0.001) compared to untreated controls.

FIG. 1. Antiproliferative activity of mushroom extract on prostate cell lines.
LNCaP (A), DU145 (B), and PC3 (C) cells were plated in the ACEA 16-well
plate (5,000 cells/well) in media alone or treated with indicated concentrations
of mushroom extract. Readings were taken every hour up to 96 h by the ACEA
machine and expressed as cell index (a measure of cell number/well). Data
represent means ± SE (n = 3); * indicates signiﬁcant difference from media
control (P ≤ 0.01). LNCap, lymph node carcinoma of the prostate.

of response to mushroom extract was similar between cell lines
(Fig. 1).

Induction of Apoptosis by Mushroom Extract

To determine whether the observed decrease in cell num-
ber after treatment with mushroom extract was due to the in-
duction of apoptosis, the formation of mononucleosomes and
oligonucleosomes was quantiﬁed using the Cell Death Detection
ELISAPLUS assay (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany)
and Annexin V/PI staining. Following treatment with mushroom
extract (20µl/ml) for 48 h, a signiﬁcant twofold increase in DNA
fragmentation was detected in the LNCaP cells (P ≤ 0.01) com-
pared to untreated controls (Fig. 2A). The PC3 and DU145 cell

lines showed no increase in the production of mononucleosomes
and oligonucleosomes with mushroom treatment compared to
untreated controls at 48 h (Fig. 2A). However, after 72 h of
treatment, mushroom extract signiﬁcantly induced DNA frag-
mentation 4.4-fold in the PC3 cells (P ≤ 0.001) and 1.8-fold in
the DU145 cells (P ≤ 0.001; Fig. 2B).

The translocation of phosphatidylserine (PS) to the outer
leaﬂet of the plasma membrane was determined using Annexin
V-FITC/PI staining and ﬂow cytometry. Changes in the location
of cell surface markers, such as PS, are the earliest detectable
features of apoptotic cells. As such, PS detection in intact cells
(PI negative cells) represent an early stage of apoptosis in the
cell lines tested following exposure to mushroom extract. In
the LNCaP cells, Annexin V positive cells increased 4.4-fold
with mushroom treatment after 48 h compared to untreated
controls (P = 0.025). In PC3 cells treated with mushroom
extract, Annexin V staining increased threefold (P ≤ 0.01),
whereas the DU145 cells exhibited a 1.4-fold increase compared
to untreated controls (Fig. 3A). After 72 h of treatment with
mushroom extract, PC3 cells had a twofold increase in Annexin
V staining (P ≤ 0.02), whereas DU145 cells had a 1.6-fold
increase in Annexin V staining (P ≤ 0.02; Fig. 3B). These
results illustrate that the LNCaP cell line is more sensitive to
the proapoptotic effects of mushroom extract compared to the

748

L. S. ADAMS ET AL.

*

Media
Mushroom

LNCaP

PC3

Cell Line

DU145

was not statistically signiﬁcant (Fig. 5B). Histological exam-
ination of the PC3 tumors showed that cell proliferation was
signiﬁcantly decreased 45% in the mushroom group compared
to controls (P ≤ 0.01; Fig. 4C), and the level of apoptosis in-
creased 200% (P ≤ 0.001; Fig. 5C). The LNCaP cell line did
not reliably form tumors when implanted into the athymic mice,
therefore we chose not to utilize that cell line for this study. The
DU145 and PC3 data illustrates the ability of mushroom extract
to decrease the growth and induce apoptosis of prostate cancer
cells in vivo.

*

*

Media
Mushroom

Inhibition of Prostate Cell Proliferation by Conjugated
Linoleic Acid

A

10.0

s

i

s
o
t
p
o
p
A

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
o
t
 
o

 

i
t
a
r
(

7.5

5.0

2.5

0.0

B

s

i

s
o
t
p
o
p
A

)
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
o
t
 
o

 

i
t
a
r
(

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

PC3

DU145

Cell Line

FIG. 3. Detection of phosphatidylserine externalization in prostate cells
treated with mushroom extract. LNCaP, PC3, and DU145 cells were exposed
to mushroom extract (20 µl/ml) for 48 h (A) and DU145 and PC3 cells were
exposed to mushroom extract (20 µl/ml) for 72 h (B). Cells were stained with
Annexin V-FITC and PI and analyzed on a FACS calibur ﬂow cytometer. Data
are expressed as percentage of Annexin V positive cells divided by Annexin
V negative cells, mean ± SE, n = 3. * indicates a signiﬁcant difference (P ≤
0.05) compared to untreated controls.

PC3 and DU145 cell lines, which respond at a later time point.
In addition, the DU145 cell line showed only a mild response to
mushroom extract and is therefore more resistant than the other
two cell lines. Additionally, this shows that the antiproliferative
activity is distinct from the proapoptotic activity of mushroom,
as all three cell lines responded equally in the proliferation
assay.

Inhibition of Tumor Growth In Vivo

To evaluate the prostate cancer protective effects of white
button mushroom in vivo, our laboratory investigated the ability
of mushroom extract to inhibit PC3 and DU145-derived tu-
mor growth in male, athymic (nu/nu) mice. The results of these
animal experiments showed that the oral intake of mushroom
extract signiﬁcantly decreased DU145 tumor weight 44.5%
(P ≤ 0.05) (Fig. 4A) and PC3 tumor weight 68.6% (P ≤
0.01; Fig. 5A) compared to pair-fed control mice. There was no
difference in mouse weight between treatment groups. Histolog-
ical examination of DU145 tumors revealed that cell prolifera-
tion was signiﬁcantly decreased 25.3% in the mushroom group
compared to controls (P ≤ 0.05; Fig. 4B), whereas the level
of apoptosis between tumors from the control and mushroom
extract-fed animals was increased, although this observation

Through GC analysis, we previously identiﬁed conjugated
linoleic acid isomer 9Z, 11E as a major component in the 6X
mushroom fraction (an average of 45.7% of the total extract).
We also showed that 9Z, 11E CLA alone inhibits breast cancer
cell proliferation through inhibition of the activity of the aro-
matase enzyme (19). Therefore, we tested the ability of the two
common isoforms of CLA (9Z, 11E and 10E, 12Z) to inhibit
prostate cancer cell proliferation. The results indicate that both
isoforms of CLA signiﬁcantly inhibited prostate cancer cell pro-
liferation in a dose dependent manner (9Z, 11E with a P value
≤0.01 and 10E, 12Z with a P value ≤0.05; Figs. 6A–6F), sug-
gesting that CLA may be one of the major active components
in mushroom extract. However, in natural products, it is gener-
ally accepted that the overall combination of components can
be more potent than any one component singled out. Further, it
is possible that one of the minor components could be as active
as CLA; however, in our breast cancer studies, the ethyl acetate
fraction was the most potent fraction, and the major constituent
was found to be CLA.

Validation of Microarray Results by Real-Time PCR

Microarray analysis results were validated by real-time PCR
using primers for three of the most highly regulated and in-
teresting genes (KIT, FAS, and FH) in tumor samples. Results
showed a signiﬁcant decrease in KIT expression and signiﬁ-
cant increases in the expression of FAS and FH (Figs. 7A–7C),
which is in agreement with the microarray analysis results.

Network Analysis of Mushroom Responsive Genes

Genes that were regulated by mushroom extract in DU-145
tumor samples were analyzed for their functional grouping us-
ing IPA. Six networks of genes were signiﬁcantly altered by
mushroom extract identiﬁed by IPA in our data set (Table 1). Of
these networks, 2 were of prime interest to this investigation:
those grouping genes important to cell death, cellular growth
and proliferation, and cellular morphology and those group-
ing genes important to cellular growth and proliferation, lipid
metabolism, and small molecule biochemistry. An illustration
of these gene networks can be found as supplemental Data 1
and 2, respectively.

WHITE BUTTON MUSHROOMS AND PROSTATE TUMOR GROWTH

749

In vivo effect of mushroom extract on DU145 prostate tumor growth. 6-wk–old, athymic, nude male mice were gavage fed with either 100 µl water
FIG. 4.
control or 100 µl mushroom extract (in water). Each animal received daily gavage treatment for 7 wk. After 1 wk of gavaging, mice were given 2 subcutaneous
injections of DU145 cells in Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). 6 wk after injection, mice were euthanized and A: tumor weights, B: Ki-67 antibody
staining for cell proliferation, and C: cleaved-caspase-3 antibody for apoptosis were evaluated. Data represent mean in each group (n ≥ 5 ± standard error of the
mean). * indicates statistical signiﬁcance from control group (P ≤ 0.05).

Within the gene networks, speciﬁc biological functions such
as apoptosis, lipid metabolism, and immune response were al-
tered by mushroom extract. These groupings suggest possible
mechanisms of action for the effects of mushroom extract ob-
served in the prostate tumors. Table 2 shows the gene symbol,
Entrez Gene number, fold change from controls, and description
of these gene groupings.

DISCUSSION

The aim of this research was to test the anticancer activity
of phytochemicals in the common white button mushroom
(Agaricus bisporus) in prostate cancer in vitro and in vivo.
Our results show that mushroom extract decreased the prolif-
eration of the prostate cancer cell lines in a dose-dependent
manner compared to untreated control cells. It is important to
note that mushroom extract had a similar antiproliferative effect
on all three cell lines despite their differing status with regard

to androgen responsiveness. Therefore, we can conclude that
the antiproliferative action of mushroom extract is mediated
through an androgen-independent mechanism.

As seen in Figs. 2 and 3, differing levels of sensitivity to
apoptosis induced by mushroom extract exist between the three
cell lines, with the LNCaP being the most sensitive, the PC3 less
sensitive, and the DU145 the least responsive to the proapoptotic
effects of mushroom extract. A similar result was seen in a study
utilizing an extract of Phellinus linteus (PL) mushroom in which
LNCaP cells underwent apoptosis to a larger degree than PC3
cells after treatment with PL. This study showed that caspase 2
expression was upregulated in LNCaP cells but not PC3 cells,
and inhibition of caspase 2 abolished the proapoptotic effect of
PL in LNCaP cells. The proapoptotic proteins caspase 8, caspase
3, and BID were activated equally in both LNCaP and PC3 cells
(20), suggesting that although apoptosis may be induced along
similar pathways in DU-45, PC3, and LNCaP prostate cancer
cell lines, the modulation of additional pathways in androgen

750

L. S. ADAMS ET AL.

FIG. 5.
In vivo effect of mushroom extract on PC3 prostate tumor growth. 6-wk–old, athymic, nude male mice were gavage fed with either 100 µl water control
or 100 µl mushroom extract (in water). Each animal received daily gavage treatment for 7 wk. After 1 wk of gavaging, mice were given 2 subcutaneous injections
of PC3 cells in Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). 6 wk after injection, mice were euthanized and A: tumor weights, B: Ki-67 antibody staining for cell
proliferation, and C: cleaved-caspase-3 antibody for apoptosis were evaluated. Data represent mean in each group (n ≥ 5 ± standard error of the mean). * indicates
statistical signiﬁcance from control group (P ≤ 0.01); ** indicates statistical signiﬁcance from control group (P ≤ 0.001).

responsive, LNCaP cells may sensitize them further and make
them more susceptible to apoptosis. Future studies will be done
to determine the mechanisms behind the differing response from
each cell line.

Our in vivo studies illustrated that oral intake of mushroom
extract suppresses the growth of androgen-independent prostate
tumors in mice. This shows that the phytochemicals present in
mushroom are active after oral ingestion. Further, the suppres-
sion of growth was due to inhibition of cell proliferation as mea-
sured by Ki-67 antibody staining, and induction of apoptosis was
observed. This result is in agreement with the in vitro results.
Our previous study (19) did not show apoptosis as a mechanism
of mushroom extract in breast cancer cells lines and tumors,
whereas in the current study in prostate cancer, apoptosis was
observed in the prostate cell lines. It is well known that distinct
cell lines within the same cancer family can respond differently
to treatment (as was seen in the current study); therefore, it is

reasonable to expect that results in two different cancer types
could also be dissimilar.

Results from microarray analysis suggest several mecha-
nisms for the effect of mushroom on prostate cancer cell prolif-
eration and apoptosis. Although the expression of many genes
was affected, two genes of primary interest are FAS/APO-1
and KIT. FAS/APO-1 is a member of the tumor necrosis fac-
tor receptor superfamily. This receptor contains a death do-
main and plays a central role in the physiological regulation of
programmed cell death (apoptosis). This gene was upregulated
2.84-fold in tumors from the mushroom group compared to pair-
fed controls (P = 0.035). KIT encodes the human homolog of
the proto-oncogene c-kit, and the protein product plays a role
in the proliferation and survival of the cell. KIT gene expres-
sion was downregulated fourfold in tumors from the mushroom
group compared to pair-fed controls (P = 0.043). These results
suggest that mushroom extract may have a favorable effect on

WHITE BUTTON MUSHROOMS AND PROSTATE TUMOR GROWTH

751

*

*

0

10

30

40
20
Time in  Hours

50

60

*

*

0

25

50

75

100

125

Time in Hours

A 

n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

)
x
e
d
n

i
 
l
l
e
c
(

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

C

n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

)
x
e
d
n

i
 
l
l

e
c
(

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

E 

n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

)
x
e
d
n

i
 
l
l

e
c
(

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0

25

*
50

*

75

Time in Hours

100

B 

n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

)
x
e
d
n

i
 
l
l

e
c
(

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

D

n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

)
x
e
d
n

i
 
l
l

e
c
(

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

F 

n
o

i
t
a
r
e
f
i
l

o
r
P

)
x
e
d
n

i
 
l
l

e
c
(

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

**

0

10

30

40
20
Time in Hours

50

60

**

**

0

25

50

75

100

125

Time in  Hours

**

75

**

100

125

0

25

50

Time in Hours

FIG. 6. CLA inhibits proliferation of prostate cancer cell lines. Cells were plated in the ACEA 16-well plate (5,000 cells/well) in media alone or treated with
indicated concentrations of CLA; A: LNCaP, 9Z, 11E CLA; B: LNCaP, 10E, 12Z CLA; C: DU145 9Z, 11E CLA; D: DU145, 10E, 12Z CLA; E: PC3, 9Z, 11E
CLA; F: PC3 10E, 12Z CLA. Readings were taken every hour up to 96 h by the ACEA machine and expressed as cell index (a measure of cell number/well). Data
represent means ± SE (n = 3). * indicates signiﬁcant difference from media control (P ≤ 0.01); **indicates signiﬁcant difference from media control (P ≤ 0.05).
Symbols: (cid:1), vehicle; ∇, 50 µM CLA;◦, 100 µM CLA;•, 200 µM CLA.

the proliferation and survival of prostate cancer cells in vivo
through increased expression of FAS and decreased expression
of KIT.

Microarray analysis results also indicate that the net effect of
mushroom extract on lipid metabolism in tumor tissues could
result in a decrease of diacylglycerol (DAG) and prostaglandin
E2 (PGE2) production/release while increasing ceramide and
arachidonic acid release. Both ceramide and arachidonic acid are
involved in proapoptotic signaling (21–23) in cancer cells. DAG
production leads to the activation of PKC and the subsequent in-
hibition of ceramide-mediated apoptosis (24). Therefore, mush-
room could also increase apoptosis through increased produc-
tion of arachidonic acid (an eicosanoid) and ceramide, which
is facilitated by inhibition of DAG production. Additionally, a

study by Ochoa et al. (25) found that the 9Z, 11E isomer of CLA,
which was found to be prominent in mushroom extract, had
signiﬁcant effects on cell proliferation and apoptosis through
modulation of eicosanoid biosynthesis in PC3 prostate cancer
cells. Speciﬁcally, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) protein expres-
sion and 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) mRNA expression were both
decreased in cells treated with 9Z, 11E CLA, suggesting that
modulation of eicosanoid biosynthesis may be one mechanism
by which CLA inhibits prostate cell proliferation (25). This data
is in agreement with the observed effects in the current study of
CLA-rich mushroom extract in prostate cancer cells.

Arachidonic acid is converted to PGE2 through the (COX-
2) pathway, and PGE2 production is commonly increased
in tumor tissues. PGE2 itself has been shown to promote

752

L. S. ADAMS ET AL.

downregulated threefold (P = 0.017), whereas FH expression
was upregulated 4.3-fold (P = 0.009) in the mushroom-treated
group compared to pair-fed controls. This is of interest due to
the unique nature of normal prostate epithelial cells to secrete
citrate rather than utilize it in the TCA cycle for the produc-
tion of ATP. Prostate cancer cells, however, alter this balance
by upregulating the citric acid cycle to produce more energy
through increased ATP production (27). Therefore, mushroom
extract may normalize the TCA cycle in prostate cancer cells by
downregulation of isocitrate dehydrogenase expression. Citrate
is converted to acetyl co-A, which is an instrumental compo-
nent in fatty acid synthesis, leading back to the above-mentioned
effects of mushroom treatment on this process.

With regard to FH, the expression of this enzyme was upreg-
ulated in mushroom-treated mice, showing that the citric acid
cycle is not entirely inhibited; and therefore, fumarate is still
produced and in need of conversion to malate. Fumarate has
been shown to activate the angiogenic factor HIF1α, therefore
augmenting the cancer’s ability to sustain and spread through
increasing its blood supply (27). Upregulation of FH expres-
sion by mushrooms would inhibit fumarate buildup in the cell
and downregulate the angiogenic response. Additionally, en-
dothelin 1, which is a gene that is commonly upregulated in
hypoxia (28), was downregulated threefold in tumor specimens
from mushroom-treated mice. Therefore, through analysis of
the microarray data, we can further hypothesize that mush-
room decreased tumor size, tumor cell proliferation, and in-
creased tumor cell apoptosis through its effects on the TCA
cycle and fatty acid metabolism. Future studies will address this
hypothesis.

Several studies have demonstrated that several mushroom
species can enhance immunity through activation of natural
killer (NK) cells (29) and modulation of lymphocyte number and
activity (30). Studies have also shown that mushroom treatment
can induce both Type 1 and Type 2 immune response (31).
Evasion of the immune response is one way in which tumor cells
survive; therefore, the effect of mushroom on the expression of
genes important to immune function, such as was seen in the
microarray analysis (Table 2), is another mechanism that could
contribute to its anticancer action in vivo.

Identiﬁcation of the phytochemicals present in mushroom
extract is important to understanding its mode of action and
could facilitate future studies by enabling the use of puriﬁed
compounds from the extract. Similar to our previous ﬁnd-
ings in breast cancer, the current study showed that CLA in-
hibited the proliferation of prostate cancer cell lines. Much
research has been published illustrating the antiproliferative
(25,32,33) and proapoptotic (34–36) activity of CLA. CLA
has also been shown to have signiﬁcant effects on the immune
system such as increased T-cell responsiveness and splenocyte
IL-2 production in mice fed 1% CLA in the diet (37). Thus,
the presence of this compound in white button mushrooms
likely signiﬁcantly adds to the biological activity of the whole
extract.

FIG. 7. Relative expression levels of c-KIT, FAS, and FH in tumor sam-
ples. mRNA expression of A: c-Kit, B: FAS, and C: FH in tumor samples
was determined by quantitative, real-time PCR, and the expression of β-actin
was monitored as the internal control. Data represent means ± SE (n = 3);
* indicates signiﬁcant difference from pair-fed control (P ≤ 0.01).

cancer progression by increasing angiogenesis through vas-
cular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) activation, blocking
apoptosis through activation of the phosphatidylinositor 3-
kinase (PI3K)/AKT/peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR) signaling pathway, increasing tumor cell proliferation
through activation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK signaling path-
way and affecting immune suppression by increasing inter-
leukin 10 (IL10) production (23,26). Therefore, the suppression
of PGE2 is one way in which mushroom extract may inhibit
prostate tumor cell growth in vivo.

These effects on lipid metabolism are complimented by the
inhibition of isocitrate dehydrogenase 2 (IDH2) and increased
expression of FH, 2 key tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle pro-
teins, which have also been shown to play a role in fatty
acid metabolism and tumor angiogenesis. IDH2 expression was

WHITE BUTTON MUSHROOMS AND PROSTATE TUMOR GROWTH

753

Gene Networks Regulated by Mushroom Extract in DU-145 Derived Tumors

TABLE 1

Molecules in Network

Score Focus Genes

Top Functions

AKR1C2, BDKRB2, COL1A1, COL3A1, DAD1, DUSP4,

29

18

Cellular growth and proliferation, lipid

EDN1, EGF, EREG, HES1, HSD17B1, IGFBP3, KIT,
KITLG, MAML1, MAML2, MAML3 (includes EG:55534),
MARCKS, MCL1, NF1, NOTCH3, PDCD4, PPAP2B,
PTPRO, RAB5A, RPS6KB2, SCNN1A, SERPINH1, SGK,
SNAI2, TPM4, VEGF, WDR1, WEE1, XRCC4

metabolism, small molecule
biochemistry

ADCYAP1, ADFP, ADH7, AKR1B10, ALDH3A1, CBS,

18

13

Inﬂammatory disease, gene expression,

CEBPA, CLIC4, CRLF1, DHRS3, DMBT1, G1P3, GSTT1,
HSPA4, IDH2, LCK, LITAF, MAP3K14, MAT2A, NFE2L2,
NFIX, OAS2, PGD, QKI, RPS11, S100A8, S100A9,
SLC1A4, SLC2A3, SOX4, SP1, TFAM, TNF, UBC, WDR48

ALPL, ALPP, BHLHB2, BMP2K, BUB1, CASP3, CLIC4,
COL4A1, CTSW, DAPK1, DFFA, DFFB, EPRS, HIF1A,
IL2, JAG2, MASK, MBP, MFAP5, NDRG1, NOTCH1,
NT5E, P4HA1, PBK, PDE4B, PLOD2, PRODH, PTK9,
PXN, RNF5, TGFB1, THRAP2, TP53, TP53RK, ZFHX1B

API5, ATG5, ATG12, BAMBI, CEACAM6, CTNNB1,

ENPP2, ESR2, FADD, FAS, FGF2, HIPK3, HSPA4L, ID4,
IFITM1, IL15, MYOD1, NP, NPTX1, PDE4B, PGK1,
PLXNA1, PTK7, PTPN13, PTPRG, RBM17, SEMA3C,
SPARC, SRC, SURB7, TCF7, THBS4, TNS1, TRFP, ZNF45

cell death

18

13

DNA replication, recombination, and

repair, cancer, tumor morphology

18

13

Cell Death, Cellular Growth and
Proliferation, Cell Morphology

ABCC2, AP1G1, AP1S1, CD44, CD53, COPA, CPB2,

18

13

Cell death, hematological disease,

CSPG6, DHX9, DUSP6, EMP2, FCGRT, FXR1, HBE1,
HOXA9, HRAS, ICAM3, IL6, IQGAP1, ITGB1, KIT,
LGALS1, MYB, NLK, NXF1, NXT2, RANBP9, RDX,
RPL27A, SPBC25, SPN, ST6GAL1, TOP2A, TYR, WSB1
ACLY, AP2A2, AP2B1, AP2M1, AP2S1, ATP6V0E, CDC40,

EPN1, EPS15, GOSR1, GOSR2, GPAA1, HRB, INS1,
ITSN1, NFYB, PICALM, PTH, RAB5A, RRM2, SCAMP1,
SIRPA, SLC34A1, SLC34A2, SLC39A8, SLC6A3,
SNAP23, SNAP25, STX16, SYNJ1, TFG, USP10, VAMP3,
VTI1B, YKT6

immunological disease

13

10

Cellular assembly and organization,
cellular function and maintenance,
cellular movement

Functional Grouping of Mushroom Extract-regulated Genes

TABLE 2

Symbol

Entrez Gene

Fold Change

Description

Apoptosis, cell death, cytotoxicity, viability, survival, proliferation, and growth

ATG5
CEACAM6

CLIC4
DAPK1
DFFA
EDN1
EGF
EMP2

9474
4680

25932
1612
1676
1906
1950
2013

2.22
–2.22

2.90
–2.28
–2.10
–3.00
–2.21
–2.20

Autophagy related 5 homolog (S. cerevisiae)
Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion

molecule 6

Chloride intracellular channel 4
Death associated protein kinase
DNA fragmentation factor alpha polypeptide
Endothelin 1
Epidermal growth factor
Epithelial membrane protein 2

(Continued on next page)

754

L. S. ADAMS ET AL.

TABLE 2

Functional Grouping of Mushroom Extract-regulated Genes (Continued)

Symbol

Entrez Gene

Fold Change

Description

FAS
HES1
IGFBP3
IL15
KIT

KITLG
LGALS1
MCL1
NF1
RBM17
S100A8
S100A9
SGK
SPC25
VEGF
WIF1
XRCC4

Lipid metabolism

BDKRB2
DHRS3
EDN1
EGF
FAS
KIT

KITLG
LGALS1
MARCKS
S100A
S100A

Immune response

ALPP
FAS
IL15
KIT

KITLG
LGALS1
NF1
S100A8
S100A9
VEGF

355
3280
3486
3600
3815

4254
956
4170
4763
84991
6279
6280
6446
57405
7422
11197
7518

624
9249
1906
1950
355
3815

4254
1956
4082
86279
96280

250
355
3600
3815

4254
1956
4763
86279
96280
7422

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family member 6

2.84
–2.75 Hairy and enhancer of split 1
–2.31
2.41
–4.00

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3
Interleukin 15
v-kit hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma viral oncogene

Lectin, galactoside-binding soluble, 1

homolog
2.50 KIT ligand
2.64
2.21 Myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1
–2.10 Neuroﬁbromin 1
2.10
3.49
2.01
2.20
2.51 NDC80 kinetochore complex component
–2.03 Vascular endothelial growth factor
–5.03 WNT inhibitory factor 1
2.12 X-ray repair complementing defective repair in Chinese

RNA binding motif protein 1
S100 calcium binding protein A8
S100 calcium binding protein A9
Serum/glucocorticoid regulated kinase

hamster cells 4

Bradykinin receptor B2

2.95
4.21 Dehydrogenas/reductase (SDR family) member 3
–3.00
–2.21
2.84
–4.00

Endothelin 1
Epidermal growth factor
TNF receptor family member 6
v-kit hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma viral oncogene

Lectin, galactoside-binding soluble, 1

homolog
2.50 KIT ligand
2.64
2.21 Myristoylated alanine-rich protein kinase C substrate
3.49
2.01

S100 calcium binding protein A8
S100 calcium binding protein A9

–4.20 Alkaline phosphatase, placental
2.84
TNF receptor family member 6
Interleukin 15
2.41
–4.00
v-kit hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma viral oncogene

Lectin, galactoside-binding soluble, 1

homolog
2.50 KIT ligand
2.64
–2.10 Neuroﬁbromin 1
S100 calcium binding protein A8
3.49
S100 calcium binding protein A9
2.01
–2.03 Vascular endothelial growth factor

Taken together with research from other laboratories, our
results support the recommendation of white button mush-
room as a dietary component that may aid in the prevention
of prostate cancer in men. The in vivo studies demonstrate

that oral intake of the extract is effective in the inhibition of
prostate tumor growth in mice. Importantly, the dosage used
in the in vivo studies is considered physiologic, as the com-
mon conversion factor from murine to human dosage is 25,

WHITE BUTTON MUSHROOMS AND PROSTATE TUMOR GROWTH

755

calculated on body surface area (38). In addition to the in-
clusion of whole mushrooms into the diet, our work with the
extract and isolation of CLA from the extract suggests that
puriﬁed compounds or mixtures of compounds from mush-
room may have efﬁcacy as potential dietary supplements. Fu-
ture study into the mechanisms of action of mushroom extract
will help us to further delineate possible roles of mushroom
phytochemicals in the prevention and treatment of prostate
cancer.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by the American Institute
for Cancer Research Grant 05B026, National Institutes of
Health Grants ES08258 and a grant from the Mushroom
Council.

REFERENCES
1. Berges RR, Vukanovic J, Epstein JI, CarMichel M, Cisek L, et al.: Impli-
cation of cell kinetic changes during the progression of human prostatic
cancer. Clin Cancer Res 1, 473–480, 1995.

2. Potter JD: Diet and cancer: possible explanations for the higher risk of

cancer in the poor. IARC Sci Publ 138, 265–283, 1997.

3. Riboli E and Norat T: Epidemiologic evidence of the protective effect of
fruit and vegetables on cancer risk. Am J Clin Nutr 78, 559S–569S, 2003.
4. Key TJ, Schatzkin A, Willett WC, Allen NE, Spencer EA, et al.: Diet,
nutrition and the prevention of cancer. Public Health Nutr 7, 187–200,
2004.

5. Wingo PA, Tong T, and Bolden S: Cancer statistics, 1995. CA Cancer J

Clin 45, 8–30, 1995.

6. Divisi D, Di Tommaso S, Salvemini S, Garramone M, and Crisci R: Diet

and cancer. Acta Biomed 77, 118–123, 2006.

7. Sliva D, Labarrere C, Slivova V, Sedlak M, Lloyd FP Jr, et al.: Ganoderma
lucidum suppresses motility of highly invasive breast and prostate cancer
cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 298, 603–612, 2002.

8. Hsieh TC and Wu JM: Cell growth and gene modulatory activities of
Yunzhi (Windsor Wunxi) from mushroom Trametes versicolor in androgen-
dependent and androgen-insensitive human prostate cancer cells. Int J On-
col 18, 81–88, 2001.

9. Xie JT, Wang CZ, Wicks S, Yin JJ, Kong J, et al.: Ganoderma lucidum
extract inhibits proliferation of SW 480 human colorectal cancer cells. Exp
Oncol 28, 25–29, 2006.

10. Zhang M, Chiu LC, Cheung PC, and Ooi VE: Growth-inhibitory effects of a
beta-glucan from the mycelium of Poria cocos on human breast carcinoma
MCF-7 cells: cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis induction. Oncol Rep 15, 637–
643, 2006.

11. Lavi I, Friesem D, Geresh S, Hadar Y, and Schwartz B: An aqueous polysac-
charide extract from the edible mushroom Pleurotus ostreatus induces anti-
proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects on HT-29 colon cancer cells. Cancer
Lett 244, 61–70, 2006.

12. Ye M, Liu JK, Lu ZX, Zhao Y, Liu SF, et al.: Grifolin, a potential antitumor
natural product from the mushroom Albatrellus conﬂuens, inhibits tumor
cell growth by inducing apoptosis in vitro. FEBS Lett 579, 3437–3443,
2005.

13. Sliva D: Ganoderma lucidum (Reishi) in cancer treatment. Integr Cancer

Ther 2, 358–364, 2003.

14. Stanley G, Harvey K, Slivova V, Jiang J, and Sliva D: Ganoderma lucidum
suppresses angiogenesis through the inhibition of secretion of VEGF and
TGF-beta1 from prostate cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 330,
46–52, 2005.

15. Goto S, Kamada K, Soh Y, Ihara Y, and Kondo T: Signiﬁcance of nuclear
glutathione S-transferase pi in resistance to anti-cancer drugs. Jpn J Cancer
Res 93, 1047–1056, 2002.

16. Yu L, Fernig DG, Smith JA, Milton JD, and Rhodes JM: Re-
versible inhibition of proliferation of epithelial cell
lines by Agari-
cus bisporus (edible mushroom) lectin. Cancer Res 53, 4627–4632,
1993.

17. Shi YL, Benzie IF, and Buswell JA: Role of tyrosinase in the genoprotective
effect of the edible mushroom, Agaricus bisporus. Life Sci 70, 1595–1608,
2002.

18. Grube BJ, Eng ET, Kao YC, Kwon A, and Chen S: White button mush-
room phytochemicals inhibit aromatase activity and breast cancer cell
proliferation. J Nutr 131, 3288–3293, 2001.

19. Chen S, Oh SR, Phung S, Hur G, Ye JJ, et al.: Anti-aromatase activity of
phytochemicals in white button mushrooms (Agaricus bisporus). Cancer
Res 66, 12026–12034, 2006.

20. Zhu T, Guo J, Collins L, Kelly J, Xiao ZJ, et al.: Phellinus linteus activates
different pathways to induce apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Br J Cancer
96, 583–590, 2007.

21. Castillo SS and Teegarden D: Ceramide conversion to sphingosine-1-
phosphate is essential for survival in C3H10T1/2 cells. J Nutr 131, 2826–
2830, 2001.

22. Voutsadakis IA: Pathogenesis of colorectal carcinoma and therapeutic im-
plications: the roles of the ubiquitin-proteasome system and Cox-2. J Cell
Mol Med 11, 252–285 2007.

23. Nakanishi M and Rosenberg DW: Roles of cPLA2alpha and arachi-
donic acid in cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta 1761, 1335–1343,
2006.

24. Schutze S, Machleidt T, and Kronke M: The role of diacylglycerol and
ceramide in tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-1 signal transduction. J
Leukoc Biol 56, 533–541, 1994.

25. Ochoa JJ, Farquharson AJ, Grant I, Moffat LE, Heys SD, et al.: Conjugated
linoleic acids (CLAs) decrease prostate cancer cell proliferation: different
molecular mechanisms for cis-9, trans-11 and trans-10, cis-12 isomers.
Carcinogenesis 25, 1185–1191, 2004.

26. Wang D and Dubois RN: Prostaglandins and cancer. Gut 55, 115–122,

2006.

27. King A, Selak MA, and Gottlieb E: Succinate dehydrogenase and fumarate
hydratase: linking mitochondrial dysfunction and cancer. Oncogene 25,
4675–4682, 2006.

28. Yamashita K, Discher DJ, Hu J, Bishopric NH, and Webster KA: Molecular
regulation of the endothelin-1 gene by hypoxia. Contributions of hypoxia-
inducible factor-1, activator protein-1, GATA-2, AND p300/CBP. J Biol
Chem 276, 12645–12653, 2001.

29. Kodama N, Komuta K, Sakai N, and Nanba H: Effects of D-Fraction, a
polysaccharide from Grifola frondosa on tumor growth involve activation
of NK cells. Biol Pharm Bull 25, 1647–1650, 2002.

30. Ng ML and Yap AT: Inhibition of human colon carcinoma development by
lentinan from shiitake mushrooms (Lentinus edodes). J Altern Complement
Med 8, 581–589, 2002.

31. Borchers AT, Keen CL, and Gershwin ME: Mushrooms, tumors, and im-

munity: an update. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 229, 393–406, 2004.

32. Coakley M, Johnson MC, McGrath E, Rahman S, Ross RP, et al.: Intestinal
biﬁdobacteria that produce trans-9, trans-11 conjugated linoleic acid: a fatty
acid with antiproliferative activity against human colon SW480 and HT-29
cancer cells. Nutr Cancer 56, 95–102, 2006.

33. Kim EJ, Shin HK, Cho JS, Lee SK, Won MH, et al.: Trans-10, cis-
12 conjugated linoleic acid inhibits the G1-S cell cycle progression
in DU145 human prostate carcinoma cells. J Med Food 9, 293–299,
2006.

34. Song HJ, Sneddon AA, Barker PA, Bestwick C, Choe SN, et al.: Con-
jugated linoleic acid inhibits proliferation and modulates protein kinase
C isoforms in human prostate cancer cells. Nutr Cancer 49, 100–108,
2004.

756

L. S. ADAMS ET AL.

35. Beppu F, Hosokawa M, Tanaka L, Kohno H, Tanaka T, et al.: Potent in-
hibitory effect of trans9, trans11 isomer of conjugated linoleic acid on the
growth of human colon cancer cells. J Nutr Biochem 17, 830–836, 2006.

36. Park HS, Chun CS, Kim S, Ha YL, and Park JH: Dietary trans-10, cis-12
and cis-9,trans-11 conjugated linoleic acids induce apoptosis in the colonic
mucosa of rats treated with 1,2-dimethylhydrazine. J Med Food 9, 22–27,
2006.

37. Hayek MG, Han SN, Wu D, Watkins BA, Meydani M, et al.:
the immune response
Dietary conjugated linoleic acid inﬂuences
of young and old C57BL/6NCrlBR mice. J Nutr 129, 32–38,
1999.

38. Devita VT, Hellman S, and Rosenberg SA: Cancer: Principles and Prac-
tice of Oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
1993.

ORIGINAL INVESTIGATION

Meat Intake and Mortality

A Prospective Study of Over Half a Million People

Rashmi Sinha, PhD; Amanda J. Cross, PhD; Barry I. Graubard, PhD;
Michael F. Leitzmann, MD, DrPH; Arthur Schatzkin, MD, DrPH

Background: High intakes of red or processed meat may
increase the risk of mortality. Our objective was to de-
termine the relations of red, white, and processed meat
intakes to risk for total and cause-specific mortality.

Methods: The study population included the National
Institutes of Health–AARP (formerly known as the Ameri-
can Association of Retired Persons) Diet and Health Study
cohort of half a million people aged 50 to 71 years at base-
line. Meat intake was estimated from a food frequency
questionnaire administered at baseline. Cox propor-
tional hazards regression models estimated hazard ra-
tios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) within
quintiles of meat intake. The covariates included in the
models were age, education, marital status, family his-
tory of cancer (yes/no) (cancer mortality only), race, body
mass index, 31-level smoking history, physical activity,
energy intake, alcohol intake, vitamin supplement use,
fruit consumption, vegetable consumption, and meno-
pausal hormone therapy among women. Main outcome
measures included total mortality and deaths due to can-
cer, cardiovascular disease, injuries and sudden deaths,
and all other causes.

in the highest vs lowest quintile of red (HR, 1.31 [95%
CI, 1.27-1.35], and HR, 1.36 [95% CI, 1.30-1.43], re-
spectively) and processed meat (HR, 1.16 [95% CI, 1.12-
1.20], and HR, 1.25 [95% CI, 1.20-1.31], respectively)
intakes had elevated risks for overall mortality. Regard-
ing cause-specific mortality, men and women had el-
evated risks for cancer mortality for red (HR, 1.22 [95%
CI, 1.16-1.29], and HR, 1.20 [95% CI, 1.12-1.30], re-
spectively) and processed meat (HR, 1.12 [95% CI, 1.06-
1.19], and HR, 1.11 [95% CI 1.04-1.19], respectively) in-
takes. Furthermore, cardiovascular disease risk was
elevated for men and women in the highest quintile of
red (HR, 1.27 [95% CI, 1.20-1.35], and HR, 1.50 [95%
CI, 1.37-1.65], respectively) and processed meat (HR, 1.09
[95% CI, 1.03-1.15], and HR, 1.38 [95% CI, 1.26-1.51],
respectively) intakes. When comparing the highest with
the lowest quintile of white meat intake, there was an in-
verse association for total mortality and cancer mortal-
ity, as well as all other deaths for both men and women.

Conclusion: Red and processed meat intakes were as-
sociated with modest increases in total mortality, can-
cer mortality, and cardiovascular disease mortality.

Results: There were 47 976 male deaths and 23 276 fe-
male deaths during 10 years of follow-up. Men and women

Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(6):562-571

M EAT INTAKE VARIES SUB-

stantially around the
world, but the impact
of consuming higher
levels of meat in rela-
tion to chronic disease mortality is am-
biguous.1-6 To increase sample size, pooled

Author Affiliations: Nutritional
Epidemiology Branch
(Drs Sinha, Cross, Leitzmann,
and Schatzkin) and Biostatistics
Branch (Dr Graubard), Division
of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health
and Human Services, Rockville,
Maryland.

For editorial comment

see page 543

analyses of meat intake have been carried
out in Seventh-Day Adventists in the
United States1,2 and other vegetarian popu-
lations in Europe.3-6 Vegetarian diets dif-
fer from nonvegetarian diets in several re-
spects. The main sources of protein in a

vegetarian diet are legumes, grains, and
nuts. Vegetarian diets also include higher
intakes of vegetables, unsaturated fats, di-
etary fiber, and antioxidants (carot-
enoids and vitamins C and E), although
they contain lower amounts of iron, zinc,
and vitamin B12. Furthermore, other life-
style factors, such as smoking, physical ac-
tivity, and alcohol consumption among
vegetarians and members of select reli-
gious groups can differ substantially from
the general population.

We prospectively investigated red, white,
and processed meat intakes as risk factors
for total mortality, as well as cause-
specific mortality, including cancer and car-
diovascular disease (CVD) mortality in a co-
hort of approximately half a million men

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

562

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018and women enrolled in the National Institutes of Health
(NIH)–AARP (formerly known as the American Associa-
tion of Retired Persons) Diet and Health Study.7 This large
prospective study facilitated the investigation of a wide
range of meat intakes with chronic disease mortality.

METHODS

STUDY POPULATION

Individuals aged 50 to 71 years were recruited from 6 US states
(California, Florida, Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina, and
Pennsylvania) and 2 metropolitan areas (Atlanta, Georgia, and
Detroit, Michigan) to form a large prospective cohort, the NIH-
AARP Diet and Health Study. Questionnaires on demographic
and lifestyle characteristics, including dietary habits, were mailed
to 3.5 million members of AARP in 1995, as described in de-
tail elsewhere.7 The NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study was ap-
proved by the Special Studies Institutional Review Board of the
US National Cancer Institute. Completion of the baseline ques-
tionnaire was considered to imply informed consent.

DIETARY ASSESSMENT

A 124-item food frequency questionnaire (http://riskfactor
.cancer.gov/DHQ/forms/files/shared/dhq1.2002.sample.pdf) was
completed at baseline. The food frequency questionnaire col-
lected information on the usual consumption of foods and drinks
and portion sizes over the last 12 months. The validity of the
food frequency questionnaire was estimated using two 24-
hour recalls,8 and the estimated energy-adjusted correlations
ranged from 0.36 to 0.76 for various nutrients and attenuation
factors ranged from 0.24 to 0.68. Red meat intake was calcu-
lated using the frequency of consumption and portion size in-
formation of all types of beef and pork and included bacon, beef,
cold cuts, ham, hamburger, hotdogs, liver, pork, sausage, steak,
and meats in foods such as pizza, chili, lasagna, and stew. White
meat included chicken, turkey, and fish and included poultry
cold cuts, chicken mixtures, canned tuna, and low-fat sau-
sages and low-fat hotdogs made from poultry. Processed meat
included bacon, red meat sausage, poultry sausage, luncheon
meats (red and white meat), cold cuts (red and white meat),
ham, regular hotdogs and low-fat hotdogs made from poultry.
The components constituting red or white and processed meats
can overlap because both can include meats such as bacon, sau-
sage, and ham, while processed meat can also included smoked
turkey and chicken. However, these meat groups are not used
in the same models; thus, they are not duplicated in any one
analysis.

To investigate whether the overall composition of meat in-
take was associated with mortality, we created 3 diet types: high-,
medium-, and low-risk meat diet. To form these diet variables,
red and white meat consumption was energy adjusted and split
into 2 groups using the median values as cut points. Individuals
with red meat consumption in the upper half and white meat con-
sumption in the lower half got a score of 1 (high-risk meat diet),
those with both red and white meat consumption in the same half
got a score of 2 (medium-risk meat diet), and those with red meat
consumption in the lower half and white meat consumption in
the upper half got a score of 3 (low-risk meat diet).

COHORT FOLLOW-UP AND CASE

ASCERTAINMENT

Cohort members were followed-up from the date the baseline
questionnaire was returned (beginning 1995) through Decem-

ber 31, 2005, by annual linkage of the cohort to the National
Change of Address database maintained by the US Postal Ser-
vice and through processing of undeliverable mail, other ad-
dress change update services, and directly from cohort mem-
bers’ notifications. For matching purposes, we have virtually
complete data on first and last name, address history, sex, and
date of birth. Follow-up for vital status is performed by annual
linkage of the cohort to the Social Security Administration Death
Master File in the US verification of vital status, and cause of
death information is provided by follow-up searches of the Na-
tional Death Index (NDI) Plus with the current follow-up for
mortality covered until 2005.

CAUSE-SPECIFIC CASE ASCERTAINMENT

Cancer (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision
[ICD-9] codes 140-239 and International Statistical Classifica-
tion of Diseases, 10th Revision [ICD-10] codes C00-C44, C45.0,
C45.1, C45.7, C45.9, C48-C97, and D12-D48) mortality in-
cluded deaths due to cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx,
digestive tract, respiratory tract, soft tissue (including heart),
skin (excluding basal and squamous cell carcinoma), female
genital system and breast, male genital system, urinary tract,
endocrine system, lymphoma, leukemia, and other miscella-
neous cancers.

Cardiovascular disease (ICD-9 codes 390-398, 401-404, 410-
438, and 440-448 and ICD-10 codes I00-I09, I10-I13, I20-I51, and
I60-I78) mortality was from a combination of diseases of the heart;
hypertension without heart disease; cerebrovascular diseases; ath-
erosclerosis; aortic aneurysm and dissection; and other diseases
of the arteries, arterioles, and capillaries.

Mortality from injuries and sudden deaths (ICD-9 codes 800-
978 and ICD-10 codes U01-U03, V01-Y09, Y35, Y85-Y86, Y87.0,
Y87.1, and Y89.0) included deaths due to unintentional in-
jury, adverse effects, suicide, self-inflicted injury, homicide, and
legal intervention.

All others deaths included mortality from tuberculosis, hu-
man immunodeficiency virus, other infectious and parasitic dis-
eases, septicemia, diabetes mellitus, Alzheimer disease, stom-
ach and duodenal ulcers, pneumonia and influenza, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease and allied conditions, chronic
liver disease and cirrhosis, nephritis, nephrotic syndrome and
nephrosis, congenital anomalies, certain conditions originat-
ing in the perinatal period, ill-defined conditions, and un-
known causes of death.

Total mortality is a combination of all of the aforemen-

tioned causes of deaths.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

A total of 617 119 persons returned the baseline question-
naire; of these, we excluded individuals who moved out of the
8 study areas before returning the baseline questionnaire
(n=321), requested to be withdrawn from the study (n=829),
died before study entry (n=261), had duplicate records (n=179),
indicated that they were not the intended respondent and did
not complete the questionnaire (n=13 442), provided no in-
formation on gender (n=6), and did not answer substantial por-
tions of the questionnaire or had more than 10 recording er-
rors (n=35 679). After these exclusions, we further removed
individuals whose questionnaire was filled in by someone else
on their behalf (n=15 760). We excluded 4849 subjects report-
ing extreme daily total energy intake defined as more than 2
interquartile ranges above the 75th percentile or below the 25th
percentile and 140 people who had zero person-years of follow-
up. After all exclusions, our analytic cohort comprised 322 263
men and 223 390 women.

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

563

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018We estimated hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence in-
tervals (CIs) with time since entry into the study as the under-
lying time metric using Cox proportional hazards regression
models. Quintile cut points were based on the entire cohort,
and multivariate-adjusted HRs are reported using the lowest
quintile as the referent category. The violation of the propor-
tional hazard assumption was investigated by testing an inter-
action between a time-dependent binary covariate, which in-
dicated if follow-up was in the first 5 years or in the second 5
years, and the quintile terms for meat consumption. Dietary
variables were energy adjusted using the nutrient density
method, and meat variables in each model added up to total
meat (addition model). For example, one model contained both
red and white meat, while the processed meat model also con-
tained a nonprocessed meat variable.

To address confounding, we used forward stepwise vari-
able selection to include covariates to develop the fully ad-
justed model. Smoking was the largest confounder of the as-
sociation between meat intake and mortality. Physical activity
and education were also important covariates, but not to the same
degree as smoking. The final model included age (continuous);
education (⬍8 years or unknown, 8-11 years, 12 years [high
school], some college, or college graduate); marital status (mar-
ried: yes/no); family history of cancer (yes/no) (cancer mortal-
ity only); race (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic/
Asian/Pacific Islander/American Indian/Alaskan native, or
unknown); body mass index (18.5 to ⬍25, 25 to ⬍30, 30 to ⬍35,
ⱖ35 [calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in me-
ters squared]); 31-level smoking history using smoking status
(never, former, or current), time since quitting for former smok-
ers and smoking dose; frequency of vigorous physical activity
(never/rarely, 1-3 times/mo, 1-2 times/wk, 3-4 times/wk, ⱖ5 times/
wk); total energy intake (continuous); alcohol intake (none, 0
to ⬍5, 5 to ⬍15, 15 to ⬍30, ⱖ30 g/d); vitamin supplement user
(ⱖ1 supplement/mo); fruit consumption (0 to ⬍0.7, 0.7 to ⬍1.2,
1.2 to ⬍1.7, 1.7 to ⬍2.5, ⱖ2.5 servings/1000 kcal); vegetable
consumption (0 to ⬍1.3, 1.3 to ⬍1.8, 1.8 to ⬍2.2, 2.2 to ⬍3.0,
ⱖ3.0 servings/1000 kcal); and menopausal hormone therapy
among women in the multivariate models.

In subanalyses, we investigated the relation between meat
intake and mortality by smoking status. We used median val-
ues of each quintile to test for linear trend with 2-sided P val-
ues. We also calculated population-attributable risks as an es-
timate of the percentage of mortality that could be prevented
if individuals adopted intake levels of participants within the
first quintile. This was computed as 1 minus the ratio consist-
ing of the sum of the estimated HR (derived from the Cox pro-
portional hazard regression models) of each member of the co-
hort divided by the sum of the estimated HR for which meat
exposure was assigned to the lowest or highest quintile, de-
pending on which quintile was the ideal level of meat con-
sumption. The population-attributable risk was multiplied by
100 to convert them to a percentage. All statistical analyses were
carried out using Statistical Analytic Systems (SAS) software
(SAS Institute Inc, Cary, North Carolina).

RESULTS

During 10 years of follow-up, there were 47 976 male
deaths and 23 276 female deaths. In general, those in the
highest quintile of red meat intake tended to consume a
slightly lower amount of white meat but a higher amount
of processed meat compared with those in the lowest quin-
tile. Subjects who consumed more red meat tended to
be married, more likely of non-Hispanic white ethnic-
ity, more likely a current smoker, have a higher body mass

index, and have a higher daily intake of energy, total fat,
and saturated fat, and they tended to have lower educa-
tion and physical activity levels and lower fruit, veg-
etable, fiber, and vitamin supplement intakes (Table 1).

RED MEAT

There was an overall increased risk of total, cancer, and
CVD mortality, as well as all other deaths in both men
(Table 2) and women (Table 3) in the highest com-
pared with the lowest quintile of red meat intake in the
fully adjusted model. There was an increased risk asso-
ciated with death from injuries and sudden death with
higher consumption of red meat in men but not in
women.

WHITE MEAT

When comparing the highest with the lowest quintile of
white meat intake, there was an inverse association for
total mortality and cancer mortality, as well as all other
deaths for both men (Table 2) and women (Table 3). In
contrast, there was a small increase in risk for CVD mor-
tality in men with higher intake of white meat. There was
no association between white meat consumption and
death from injuries and sudden death in men or women.

PROCESSED MEAT

There was an overall increased risk of total, cancer, and CVD
mortality, as well as all other deaths in both men (Table 2)
and women (Table 3) in the highest compared with the low-
est quintile of processed meat intake. In contrast, there was
no association for processed meat intake and death from
injuries and sudden death in either sex.

A lag analysis, excluding deaths occurring in the first
2 years of follow-up, produced results consistent with the
main findings in Table 2 and Table 3. For example, the
HRs for total mortality in men for red meat was as fol-
lows: second quintile HR, 1.05 (95% CI, 1.01-1.09); third
quintile HR, 1.13 (95% CI, 1.09-1.17); fourth quintile
HR, 1.20 (95% CI, 1.16-1.24); and fifth quintile HR, 1.30
(95% CI, 1.26-1.35). For women, the HRs were as fol-
lows: second quintile HR, 1.07 (95% CI, 1.02-1.12); third
quintile HR, 1.15 (95% CI, 1.11-1.21); fourth quintile
HR, 1.27 (95% CI, 1.21-1.33); and fifth quintile HR, 1.35
(95% CI, 1.28-1.42). Furthermore, we investigated our
models for a violation of the proportional hazard as-
sumption. Proportional hazard assumption was not re-
jected for all analyses except one, the model with red and
white meat among the women for total mortality (P=.008).
On further examination in that model of the relative HR
between the first 5 years of follow-up and the second 5
years of follow-up, the red meat results were consistent
between the 2 follow-up periods. However, for white meat,
the second 5-year period showed less of an inverse trend
compared with the first 5-year period (data not shown).
We investigated whether people who consumed a high-
risk meat diet had mortality risk profiles that were dif-
ferent from people who consumed a low-risk meat diet.
Both men and women who consumed a low-risk meat
diet had statistically significant lower HRs compared with

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

564

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018Table 1. Selected Age-Adjusted Characteristics of the National Institutes of Health–AARP Cohort by Red Meat Quintile Categorya

Red Meat Intake Quintile, g/1000 kcal

Non-Hispanic white
Non-Hispanic black
Hispanic/Asian/Pacific Islander/American Indian/Alaskan native/unknown

Characteristic

Meat intake

Red meat, g/1000 kcal
White meat, g/1000 kcal
Processed meat, g/1000 kcal

Age, y
Race, %

Positive family history of cancer,%
Currently married, %
BMI
Smoking history, %b

Never smoker
Former smoker
Current smoker or having quit ⬍1 y prior

Education, college graduate or postgraduate, %
Vigorous physical activity ⱖ5 times/wk, %
Dietary intake

Energy, kcal/d
Fruit, servings/1000 kcal
Vegetables, servings/1000 kcal
Alcohol, g/d
Total fat, g/1000 kcal
Saturated fat, g/1000 kcal
Fiber, g/1000 kcal
Vitamin supplement use ⱖ1/mo

Meat intake

Red meat, g/1000 kcal
White meat, g/1000 kcal
Processed meat, g/1000 kcal

Age, y
Race, %

Non-Hispanic white
Non-Hispanic black
Hispanic/Asian/Pacific Islander/American Indian/Alaskan native/unknown

Positive family history of cancer, %
Currently married, %
BMI
Never received HT (women only)
Smoking history, %b

Never smoker
Former smoker
Current smoker or having quit ⬍1 y prior

Education, college graduate or postgraduate, %
Vigorous physical activity ⱖ5 times/wk, %
Dietary intake, %
Energy, kcal/d
Fruit, servings/1000 kcal
Vegetables, servings/1000 kcal
Alcohol, g/d
Total fat, g/1000 kcal
Saturated fat, g/1000 kcal
Fiber, g/1000 kcal
Vitamin supplement use ⱖ1/mo

Q1

Q2

Men (n=322 263)

Q3

31.5
30.7
10.3
62.5

93.1
2.7
4.2
48.4
86.1
27.1

28.8
57.5
9.9
45.1
20.5

Q4

Q5

43.1
30.4
13.3
62.3

94.0
2.2
3.8
48.6
86.7
27.6

27.6
57.1
11.4
42.3
18.6

68.1
30.9
19.4
61.7

94.1
1.9
4.0
47.8
85.6
28.3

25.4
55.8
14.8
39.1
16.3

9.3
36.6
5.1
62.8

88.6
4.2
7.2
47.0
80.8
25.9

34.4
56.5
4.9
53.0
30.7

21.4
32.2
7.8
62.8

91.8
3.2
5.0
47.7
84.4
26.7

30.5
58.1
7.6
47.3
23.6

1899

1955

1998

2038

2116

2.3
2.4
20.2
25.8
7.6
13.2
67.3

Women (n=223 390)

1.8
2.1
20.4
30.5
9.4
11.0
62.1

21.2
35.6
6.4
62.2

89.9
5.5
4.5
53.0
42.4
26.6
463

44.3
39.5
12.7
30.7
16.3

1.6
2.0
17.6
33.5
10.5
10.2
59.1

31.2
34.9
8.7
62.0

91.0
4.8
4.3
52.9
46.3
27.1
47.1

43.23
38.1
15.3
27.7
13.9

1.4
2.0
15.3
35.9
11.3
9.6
55.8

42.8
35.1
11.3
61.7

91.8
4.1
4.1
52.4
48.8
27.7
48.1

42.2
37.0
17.7
25.6
12.0

1.1
1.9
12.5
39.4
12.7
8.8
52.0

65.9
35.3
16.0
61.3

91.4
3.8
4.9
51.5
50.7
28.4
50.5

40.0
35.4
21.2
22.7
11.0

9.1
37.4
3.8
62.2

86.2
7.5
6.3
51.4
37.2
25.6
46.6

45.5
41.8
8.8
37.1
22.5

1526

1539

1584

1613

1646

2.5
2.8
5.8
27.7
8.3
13.8
72.2

2.0
2.5
6.3
32.1
9.9
11.7
68.4

1.8
2.4
6.2
34.7
10.8
10.9
66.1

1.5
2.3
5.7
37.0
11.6
10.3
63.7

1.3
2.3
5.1
40.1
12.7
9.5
58.8

Abbreviations: AARP, formerly the American Association of Retired Persons; BMI, body mass index (calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in

meters squared); HT, hormone therapy; Q, quintile.

aData are given as mean value or percentage of participants (N = 545 653). Generalized linear models were used to estimate mean values for the continuous

variables and frequencies for dichotomous proportions within each red meat intake quintile.

bA total of 12 597 men (3.9%) and 7885 women (3.5%) had missing smoking history data.

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

565

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018Table 2. Multivariate Analysis for Red, White, and Processed Meat Intake and Total and Cause-Specific Mortality in Men
in the National Institutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health Studya

Mortality in Men
(n=322 263)

All mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

Cancer mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

CVD mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

Mortality from injuries and sudden deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

All other deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

All mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

Cancer mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

CVD mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

Mortality from injuries and sudden deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

All other deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

Q1

Q2
Red Meat Intakeb

Quintile

Q3

Q4

Q5

P Value
for Trend

6437

7835

9366

10 988

13 350

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.07 (1.03-1.10)
1.06 (1.03-1.10)

1.17 (1.13-1.21)
1.14 (1.10-1.18)

1.27 (1.23-1.31)
1.21 (1.17-1.25)

1.48 (1.43-1.52)
1.31 (1.27-1.35)

⬍.001
⬍.001

2136

2701

3309

3839

4448

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.10 (1.04-1.17)
1.05 (0.99-1.11)

1.23 (1.16-1.29)
1.13 (1.07-1.20)

1.31 (1.24-1.39)
1.18 (1.12-1.25)

1.44 (1.37-1.52)
1.22 (1.16-1.29)

⬍.001
⬍.001

1997

2304

2703

3256

3961

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.02 (0.96-1.08)
0.99 (0.96-1.09)

1.10 (1.04-1.17)
1.08 (1.02-1.15)

1.24 (1.17-1.31)
1.18 (1.12-1.26)

1.44 (1.37-1.52)
1.27 (1.20-1.35)

⬍.001
⬍.001

184

216

228

280

343

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.02 (0.84-1.24)
1.06 (0.86-1.29)

0.97 (0.80-1.18)
1.01 (0.83-1.24)

1.09 (0.90-1.31)
1.14 (0.94-1.39)

1.24 (1.03-1.49)
1.26 (1.04-1.54)

.01
.008

1268

1636

1971

2239

2962

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.13 (1.05-1.22)
1.17 (1.09-1.26)

1.25 (1.17-1.35)
1.28 (1.19-1.38)

1.33 (1.24-1.42)
1.34 (1.25-1.44)

1.68 (1.57-1.80)
1.58 (1.47-1.70)

⬍.001
⬍.001

White Meat Intakee

12 521

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

10 442

9359

8444

7210

0.83 (0.81-0.85)
0.92 (0.90-0.95)

0.77 (0.75-0.79)
0.90 (0.88-0.93)

0.74 (0.72-0.76)
0.90 (0.88-0.93)

0.74 (0.72-0.76)
0.92 (0.89-0.94)

⬍.001
⬍.001

4424

3647

3203

2830

2329

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.82 (0.79-0.86)
0.91 (0.87-0.95)

0.74 (0.71-0.78)
0.87 (0.83-0.91)

0.71 (0.67-0.74)
0.85 (0.81-0.90)

0.68 (0.65-0.72)
0.84 (0.80-0.88)

⬍.001
⬍.001

3521

3015

2771

2578

2336

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.85 (0.81-0.89)
0.96 (0.91-1.00)

0.81 (0.77-0.85)
0.96 (0.91-1.01)

0.81 (0.77-0.85)
0.99 (0.94-1.04)

0.86 (0.81-0.90)
1.05 (1.00-1.11)

⬍.001
.009

333

266

249

219

184

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.81 (0.69-0.95)
0.89 (0.76-1.05)

0.78 (0.66-0.93)
0.90 (0.76-1.06)

0.73 (0.62-0.87)
0.86 (0.72-1.03)

0.71 (0.59-0.85)
0.85 (0.70-1.02)

⬍.001
.11

2775

2206

1948

1722

1425

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.79 (0.75-0.83)
0.90 (0.85-0.95)

0.72 (0.68-0.76)
0.88 (0.83-0.93)

0.68 (0.64-0.73)
0.86 (0.81-0.92)

0.67 (0.63-0.72)
0.86 (0.80-0.92)

⬍.001
⬍.001

(continued)

people who consumed a high-risk meat diet for all-
cause, cancer, and CVD mortality, as well as all other
deaths; for example, for all-cause mortality, the HR for a
low-risk meat diet was 0.92 (95% CI, 0.80-0.94) for men
and 0.80 (95% CI, 0.78-0.84) for women.

To further explore possible confounding by smoking,
we analyzed meat intake and mortality in 2 subgroups—
never smokers (15 413 deaths among 190 135 never smok-
ers) and former/current smokers (n=52 754 deaths among
335 036 former/current smokers). For men, the risks in the
fifth quintile of red meat intake for never and former/
current smokers were as follows: for total mortality, HR,
1.28 (95% CI, 1.19-1.38), and HR, 1.25 (95% CI, 1.20-
1.30), respectively; for cancer mortality, HR, 1.16 (95% CI,

1.02-1.33), and HR, 1.17 (95% CI, 1.09-1.24), respec-
tively; and for CVD mortality, HR, 1.43 (95% CI, 1.25-
1.63), and HR, 1.17 (95% CI, 1.10-1.26), respectively. In
women, the risks in the fifth quintile of red meat intake for
never and former/current smokers were as follows: for total
mortality, HR, 1.36 (95% CI, 1.25-1.48), and HR, 1.28 (95%
CI, 1.21-1.35), respectively; for cancer mortality, HR, 1.10
(95% CI, 0.95-1.27), and HR, 1.16 (95% CI, 1.06-1.27),
respectively; and for CVD mortality, HR, 1.63 (95% CI, 1.38-
1.93), and HR, 1.34 (95% CI, 1.18-1.51), respectively. Risks
were similar for the 2 smoking categories in most in-
stances for processed meat except for cancer mortality, for
which we found a null relation for both sexes in never smok-
ers (men: HR, 1.01 [95% CI, 0.88-1.15]; women: HR, 1.02

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

566

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018Table 2. Multivariate Analysis for Red, White, and Processed Meat Intake and Total and Cause-Specific Mortality in Men
in the National Institutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health Studya (continued)

Mortality in Men
(n=322 263)

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld
Cancer mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

CVD mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

Mortality from injuries and sudden deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

All other deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld

Quintile

Q1

6235

Q2

Processed Meat Intakef

7738

Q3

9435

Q4

11 249

Q5

13 319

P Value
for Trend

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.04 (1.01-1.08)
1.01 (0.98-1.04)

1.13 (1.09-1.16)
1.07 (1.04-1.11)

1.20 (1.16-1.24)
1.12 (1.08-1.16)

1.30 (1.26-1.34)
1.16 (1.12-1.20)

⬍.001
⬍.001

2032

2784

3334

3906

4377

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.15 (1.08-1.22)
1.07 (1.01-1.14)

1.22 (1.15-1.29)
1.11 (1.05-1.17)

1.28 (1.21-1.35)
1.14 (1.07-1.20)

1.32 (1.25-1.39)
1.12 (1.06-1.19)

⬍.001
.001

1977

2225

2752

3255

4012

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.94 (0.88-1.00)
0.92 (0.87-0.98)

1.02 (0.96-1.09)
0.99 (0.93-1.05)

1.08 (1.02-1.14)
1.02 (0.96-1.08)

1.22 (1.15-1.29)
1.09 (1.03-1.15)

⬍.001
⬍.001

190

201

257

273

330

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.87 (0.72-1.07)
0.88 (0.72-1.08)

0.98 (0.81-1.19)
0.99 (0.81-1.20)

0.93 (0.77-1.13)
0.93 (0.76-1.13)

1.04 (0.86-1.25)
1.00 (0.83-1.21)

.24
.48

1259

1548

1896

2430

2943

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.05 (0.97-1.13)
1.05 (0.97-1.13)

1.15 (1.07-1.23)
1.14 (1.06-1.23)

1.31 (1.22-1.41)
1.28 (1.19-1.38)

1.46 (1.36-1.56)
1.33 (1.24-1.43)

⬍.001
⬍.001

Abbreviations: AARP, formerly the American Association of Retired Persons; CVD, cardiovascular disease.
aData are given as hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) unless otherwise specified.
bMedian red meat intake based on men and women (g/1000 kcal): Q1, 9.8; Q2, 21.4; Q3, 31.3; Q4, 42.8; and Q5, 62.5.
cBasic model: age (continuous); race (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic/Asian/Pacific Islander/American Indian/Alaskan native, or unknown);

and total energy intake (continuous).

dAdjusted model: basic model plus education (⬍8 years or unknown, 8-11 years, 12 years [high school], some college, or college graduate); marital status

(married: yes/no); family history of cancer (yes/no) (cancer mortality only); body mass index (18.5 to ⬍25, 25 to ⬍30, 30 to ⬍35, ⱖ35 [calculated as weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared]); 31-level smoking history using smoking status (never, former, current), time since quitting for former smokers,
and smoking dose; frequency of vigorous physical activity (never/rarely, 1-3 times/mo, 1-2 times/wk, 3-4 times/wk, ⱖ5 times/wk); alcohol intake (none, 0 to ⬍5,
5 to ⬍15, 15 to ⬍30, ⱖ30 servings/1000 kcal), vitamin supplement user (ⱖ1 supplement/mo); fruit consumption (0 to ⬍0.7, 0.7 to ⬍1.2, 1.2 to ⬍1.7, 1.7 to
⬍2.5, ⱖ2.5 servings/1000 kcal); and vegetable consumption (0 to ⬍1.3, 1.3 to ⬍1.8, 1.8 to ⬍2.2, 2.2 to ⬍3.0, ⱖ3.0 serving/1000 kcal).

eMedian white meat intake based on men and women (g/1000 kcal): Q1, 9.5; Q2, 18.4; Q3, 27.4; Q4, 39.4; and Q5, 64.6.
fMedian processed meat intake based on men and women (g/1000 kcal): Q1, 1.6; Q2, 4.4; Q3, 7.4; Q4, 12.2; and Q5, 22.6.

[95% CI, 0.89-1.17]), but in former/current smokers we
found higher risks (men: HR, 1.12 [95% CI, 1.05-1.19];
women: HR, 1.11 [95% CI, 1.02-1.21]). Intriguingly, there
was increased risk with higher intake of white meat for CVD
mortality in never smokers (men: HR, 1.24 [95% CI, 1.10-
1.40]; women: HR, 1.20 [95% CI, 1.03-1.41]).

We calculated the population attributable risks, rep-
resenting the percentage of deaths that could be pre-
vented if individuals adopted red or processed meat in-
take levels of participants within the first quintile. For
overall mortality, 11% of deaths in men and 16% of deaths
in women could be prevented if people decreased their
red meat consumption to the level of intake in the first
quintile. The impact on CVD mortality was an 11% de-
crease in men and a 21% decrease in women if the red
meat consumption was decreased to the amount con-
sumed by individuals in the first quintile. The median
red meat consumption based on men and women in the
first quintile was 9.8 g/1000 kcal/d compared with 62.5
g/1000 kcal/d in the fifth quintile. For women eating pro-
cessed meat at the first quintile level, the decrease in CVD
mortality was approximately 20%. The median pro-
cessed meat consumption based on men and women in
the first quintile was 1.6 g/1000 kcal/d compared with
22.6 g/1000 kcal/d in the fifth quintile.

COMMENT

We examined total and cause-specific mortality in rela-
tion to meat consumption in a large prospective study.
We found modest increases in risk for total mortality, as
well as cancer and CVD mortality, with higher intakes
of red and processed meat in both men and women. In
contrast, higher white meat consumption was associ-
ated with a small decrease in total and cancer mortality
in men and women.

The principal strength of this study is the large size
of the cohort, which provided us the ability to investi-
gate the relationship of many deaths (47 976 male deaths
and 23 276 female deaths) within the context of a single
study with a standardized protocol and a wide range of
meat consumption. In contrast, other reports investigat-
ing meat intake in relation to mortality have pooled data
from different studies conducted in California, the United
Kingdom, and Germany because the numbers of events
were limited in each study.1-6,9-14 The protocols and ques-
tionnaires in these studies were different, as were the
populations: Seventh-Day Adventists in California and
vegetarians and nonvegetarians in Europe. Pooled analy-
ses of specialized populations with distinct healthy life-
styles are subject to unmeasured confounding. Further-

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

567

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018Table 3. Multivariate Analysis Red, White, and Processed Meat Intake and Total and Cause-Specific Mortality in Women
in the National Institutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health Studya

Mortality in Women
(n=223 390)

All mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Cancer mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

CVD mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Mortality from injuries and sudden deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

All other deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

All Mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Cancer mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

CVD mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Mortality from injuries and sudden deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

All other deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Q1

Q2
Red Meat Intakeb

Quintile

Q3

5314

5081

4734

P Value
for Trend

Q4

4395

Q5

3752

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.11 (1.07-1.16)
1.08 (1.03-1.12)

1.24 (1.20-1.29)
1.17 (1.12-1.22)

1.43 (1.38-1.49)
1.28 (1.23-1.34)

1.63 (1.56-1.70)
1.36 (1.30-1.43)

⬍.001
⬍.001

2134

1976

1784

1687

1348

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.07 (1.01-1.14)
1.02 (0.96-1.09)

1.15 (1.08-1.23)
1.06 (1.00-1.14)

1.34 (1.26-1.43)
1.20 (1.12-1.28)

1.42 (1.33-1.52)
1.20 (1.12-1.30)

⬍.001
⬍.001

1173

1155

1101

1027

900

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.15 (1.06-1.25)
1.13 (1.04-1.23)

1.32 (1.22-1.44)
1.26 (1.16-1.37)

1.54 (1.41-1.68)
1.39 (1.27-1.52)

1.82 (1.66-1.98)
1.50 (1.37-1.65)

⬍.001
⬍.001

129

97

74

76

61

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.86 (0.66-1.12)
0.85 (0.65-1.12)

0.77 (0.58-1.03)
0.75 (0.56-1.02)

0.96 (0.72-1.28)
0.92 (0.68-1.25)

1.01 (0.74-1.37)
0.94 (0.68-1.31)

.88
.88

1178

1187

1181

1058

961

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.18 (1.09-1.28)
1.16 (1.07-1.26)

1.41 (1.30-1.53)
1.35 (1.24-1.47)

1.58 (1.45-1.72)
1.44 (1.32-1.57)

1.91 (1.76-2.09)
1.61 (1.46-1.76)

⬍.001
⬍.001

White Meat Intakef

5006

4606

4469

4520

4675

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.87 (0.84-0.91)
0.96 (0.92-1.00)

0.81 (0.78-0.84)
0.94 (0.90-0.98)

0.78 (0.75-0.81)
0.95 (0.91-0.99)

0.76 (0.73-0.79)
0.92 (0.88-0.96)

⬍.001
⬍.001

1887

1757

1728

1735

1822

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.89 (0.83-0.95)
0.94 (0.88-1.01)

0.84 (0.78-0.90)
0.92 (0.86-0.99)

0.80 (0.75-0.85)
0.92 (0.86-0.98)

0.78 (0.73-0.83)
0.89 (0.83-0.95)

⬍.001
.001

1107

1007

1090

1049

1103

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.86 (0.79-0.93)
0.97 (0.89-1.06)

0.89 (0.82-0.97)
1.07 (0.98-1.17)

0.82 (0.75-0.89)
1.05 (0.96-1.14)

0.81 (0.75-0.88)
1.04 (0.96-1.14)

⬍.001
.19

89

81

92

86

89

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.92 (0.68-1.25)
0.96 (0.71-1.31)

1.01 (0.75-1.35)
1.09 (0.81-1.47)

0.89 (0.66-1.20)
0.99 (0.73-1.34)

0.82 (0.61-1.10)
0.91 (0.67-1.24)

.17
.52

1319

1155

1016

1055

1020

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

0.82 (0.76-0.89)
0.93 (0.86-1.01)

0.69 (0.64-0.75)
0.84 (0.77-0.91)

0.68 (0.63-0.74)
0.88 (0.82-0.96)

0.63 (0.58-0.68)
0.82 (0.75-0.89)

⬍.001
⬍.001

(continued)

more, recall bias and reverse causality were minimized
in our study because diet was assessed prior to the diag-
nosis of the conditions that led to death.

There is a possibility that some residual confounding
by smoking may remain; however, we used a detailed 31-
level smoking history variable and repeated the analyses
within smoking status strata. Within smoking subgroups,
we found consistent results for red, white, and processed
meat intakes; however, there were some intriguing differ-
ences that could be further investigated. We found a posi-
tive association for processed meat intake and cancer mor-
tality among former/current smokers but not among never
smokers. This may be because we were still not able to fully
statistically adjust for residual confounding of smoking be-
cause people who eat processed meat may also smoke. An

additional reason could be that in addition to being ex-
posed to N-nitroso compounds from processed meats,
smokers inhale carcinogenic chemicals. The possible rea-
son why there was an increased risk with white meat con-
sumption among never smokers is not readily apparent.
Because our cohort was predominantly non-
Hispanic white, more educated, consumed less fat and
red meat and more fiber and fruits and vegetables, and
had fewer current smokers than similarly aged adults in
the US population, caution should be applied when at-
tempting to generalize our findings to other popula-
tions,7 although this caution is somewhat tempered be-
cause it is unlikely that the mechanisms relating meat to
mortality differ quantitatively between our study popu-
lation and other white populations older than 50 years.

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

568

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018Table 3. Multivariate Analysis Red, White, and Processed Meat Intake and Total and Cause-Specific Mortality in Women
in the National Institutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health Studya (continued)

Mortality in Women
(n=223 390)

All mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Cancer mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

CVD mortality

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Mortality from injuries and sudden deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

All other deaths

Deaths
Basic modelc
Adjusted modeld,e

Q1

Q2

Quintile

Q3

Processed Meat Intakeg

5624

5133

4525

P Value
for Trend

Q4

4181

Q5

3813

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.13 (1.09-1.17)
1.07 (1.03-1.12)

1.20 (1.15-1.25)
1.11 (1.06-1.15)

1.35 (1.29-1.40)
1.20 (1.15-1.25)

1.49 (1.43-1.56)
1.25 (1.20-1.31)

⬍.001
⬍.001

2283

2035

1722

1550

1339

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.08 (1.02-1.15)
1.03 (0.97-1.10)

1.10 (1.04-1.18)
1.02 (0.96-1.09)

1.21 (1.13-1.30)
1.10 (1.02-1.17)

1.28 (1.19-1.37)
1.11 (1.04-1.19)

⬍.001
.001

1245

1132

1039

973

967

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.13 (1.04-1.22)
1.08 (0.99-1.17)

1.25 (1.14-1.35)
1.15 (1.05-1.25)

1.41 (1.29-1.54)
1.24 (1.13-1.35)

1.69 (1.55-1.84)
1.38 (1.26-1.51)

⬍.001
⬍.001

118

115

71

71

62

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.22 (0.94-1.59)
1.21 (0.93-1.57)

0.91 (0.67-1.23)
0.89 (0.65-1.21)

1.10 (0.82-1.50)
1.06 (0.78-1.45)

1.18 (0.86-1.62)
1.10 (0.80-1.53)

.52
.83

1265

1174

1101

1055

970

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1.16 (1.07-1.26)
1.11 (1.02-1.20)

1.32 (1.22-1.44)
1.22 (1.12-1.32)

1.54 (1.42-1.68)
1.35 (1.24-1.47)

1.72 (1.58-1.87)
1.39 (1.27-1.51)

⬍.001
⬍.001

Abbreviations: AARP, formerly the American Association of Retired Persons; CVD, cardiovascular disease.
aData are given as hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) unless otherwise specified.
bMedian red meat intake based on men and women (g/1000 kcal): Q1, 9.8; Q2, 21.4; Q3, 31.3; Q4, 42.8; and Q5, 62.5.
cBasic model: age (continuous); race (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic/Asian/Pacific Islander/American Indian/Alaskan native, or unknown);

and total energy intake (continuous).

dAdjusted model: basic model plus education (⬍8 years or unknown, 8-11 years, 12 years [high school], some college, or college graduate); marital status

(married: yes/no); family history of cancer (yes/no) (cancer mortality only); body mass index (18.5 to ⬍25, 25 to ⬍30, 30 to ⬍35, ⱖ35 [calculated as weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared]); 31-level smoking history using smoking status (never, former, current), time since quitting for former smokers,
and smoking dose; frequency of vigorous physical activity (never/rarely, 1-3 times/mo, 1-2 times/wk, 3-4 times/wk, ⱖ5 times/wk); alcohol intake (none, 0 to ⬍5,
5 to ⬍15, 15 to ⬍30, ⱖ30 servings/1000 kcal), vitamin supplement user (ⱖ1 supplement/mo); fruit consumption (0 to ⬍0.7, 0.7 to ⬍1.2, 1.2 to ⬍1.7, 1.7 to
⬍2.5, ⱖ2.5 servings/1000 kcal); and vegetable consumption (0 to ⬍1.3, 1.3 to ⬍1.8, 1.8 to ⬍2.2, 2.2 to ⬍3.0, ⱖ3.0 serving/1000 kcal).

eHormone therapy included in models for women.
fMedian white meat intake based on men and women (g/1000 kcal): Q1, 9.5; Q2, 18.4; Q3, 27.4; Q4, 39.4; and Q5, 64.6.
gMedian processed meat intake based on men and women (g/1000 kcal): Q1, 1.6; Q2, 4.4; Q3, 7.4; Q4, 12.2; and Q5, 22.6.

Furthermore, the population-attributable risks in our co-
hort may be conservative estimates because red and pro-
cessed meat consumption may be higher in the general
population than in our cohort.

The inherent limitations of measurement error in this
study are similar to those of any nutritional epidemio-
logic study that is based on recall of usual intake over a
given period. We attempted to reduce measurement er-
ror by adjusting our models for reported energy in-
take.15 The correlations for red meat consumption as-
sessed from the food frequency questionnaire compared
with two 24-hour recall diaries were 0.62 for men and
0.70 for women, as reported previously by Schatzkin et
al.7 The problem of residual confounding may still exist
and could explain the relatively small associations found
throughout this study despite the care taken to adjust for
known confounders.

Overall, we did not find statistically significant asso-
ciation between meat consumption and deaths from in-
jury and sudden deaths in most instances. The relative
HRs of meat consumption with the other causes of death
(total, cancer, and CVD mortality) were similar in mag-
nitude in some cases to those of deaths from injury and
sudden deaths; however, the number of deaths from in-

jury and sudden deaths was less than the other causes of
deaths, and thus the HRs were generally not statistically
significant. We observed a higher risk with the category
that included “all other deaths”; this is a broad category
with many heterogeneous conditions (eg, diabetes melli-
tus, Alzheimer disease, stomach and duodenal ulcers,
chronic liver disease, cirrhosis, nephritis, nephrotic syn-
drome, and nephrosis), some of which may be posi-
tively related to meat intake.

There are various mechanisms by which meat may be
related to mortality. In relation to cancer, meat is a source
of several multisite carcinogens, including heterocyclic
amines and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,16-21 which
are both formed during high-temperature cooking of meat,
as well as N-nitroso compounds.22,23 Iron in red meat may
increase oxidative damage and increase the formation of
N-nitroso compounds.24-27 Furthermore, meat is a ma-
jor source of saturated fat, which has been positively as-
sociated with breast28-30 and colorectal cancer.31

In relation to CVD, elevated blood pressure has been
shown to be positively associated with higher intakes of
red and processed meat, even though the mechanism is
unclear, except that possibly meat may substitute for other
beneficial foods such as grains, fruits, or vegetables.32 Mean

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

569

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018plasma total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein choles-
terol, very-low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and tri-
glyceride levels were found to be decreased in subjects
who substituted red meat with fish.33,34 Vegetarians have
lower arachidonic, eicosapentaenoic, and docosahexae-
noic acid levels and higher linoleate and antioxidant lev-
els in platelet phospholipids; such a biochemical profile
may be related to decreased atherogenesis and throm-
bogenesis.34-36

Red and processed meat intakes, as well as a high-
risk meat diet, were associated with a modest increase
in risk of total mortality, cancer, and CVD mortality in
both men and women. In contrast, high white meat in-
take and a low-risk meat diet was associated with a small
decrease in total and cancer mortality. These results
complement the recommendations by the American In-
stitute for Cancer Research and the World Cancer Re-
search Fund to reduce red and processed meat intake to
decrease cancer incidence.31 Future research should in-
vestigate the relation between subtypes of meat and spe-
cific causes of mortality.

Accepted for Publication: October 24, 2008.
Correspondence: Rashmi Sinha, PhD, Division of Can-
cer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute–
Nutritional Epidemiology Branch, 6120 Executive Blvd,
Rockville, MD 20852 (sinhar@nih.gov).
Author Contributions: Drs Sinha and Cross had full ac-
cess to the data in the study and take responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analy-
sis. All authors have given full approval to the final manu-
script. Study concept and design: Sinha, Cross, and
Graubard. Acquisition of data: Sinha and Schatzkin. Analy-
sis and interpretation of data: Sinha, Cross, Graubard,
Leitzmann, and Schatzkin. Drafting of the manuscript:
Sinha, Cross, and Graubard. Critical revision of the manu-
script for important intellectual content: Sinha, Cross,
Graubard, Leitzmann, and Schatzkin. Statistical analy-
sis: Sinha, Graubard, and Leitzmann. Obtained funding:
Schatzkin. Administrative, technical, and material sup-
port: Cross and Schatzkin.
Financial Disclosure: None reported.
Funding/Support: This research was supported in part
by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, Na-
tional Cancer Institute (NCI).
Additional Contributions: Adam Risch, Leslie Carroll,
MA, and Dave Campbell from Information Manage-
ment Services Inc, and Traci Mouw, MS, from NCI, as-
sisted in data management. We are indebted to the par-
ticipants in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study for their
outstanding cooperation. Cancer incidence data from the
Atlanta metropolitan area were collected by the Georgia
Center for Cancer Statistics, Department of Epidemiol-
ogy, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University.
Cancer incidence data from California were collected by
the California Department of Health Services, Cancer Sur-
veillance Section. Cancer incidence data from the De-
troit metropolitan area were collected by the Michigan
Cancer Surveillance Program, Community Health Ad-
ministration. The Florida cancer incidence data used in
this report were collected by the Florida Cancer Data Sys-
tem under contract to the Department of Health (DOH)

(the views expressed herein are solely those of the au-
thors and do not necessarily reflect those of the contrac-
tor or the DOH). Cancer incidence data from Louisiana
were collected by the Louisiana Tumor Registry, Loui-
siana State University Medical Center in New Orleans.
Cancer incidence data from New Jersey were collected
by the New Jersey State Cancer Registry, Cancer Epide-
miology Services, New Jersey State Department of Health
and Senior Services. Cancer incidence data from North
Carolina were collected by the North Carolina Central
Cancer Registry. Cancer incidence data from Pennsyl-
vania were supplied by the Division of Health Statistics
and Research, Pennsylvania Department of Health, Har-
risburg (the Pennsylvania Department of Health specifi-
cally disclaims responsibility for any analyses, interpre-
tations, or conclusions).

REFERENCES

1. Fraser GE. Associations between diet and cancer, ischemic heart disease, and
all-cause mortality in non-Hispanic white California Seventh-day Adventists. Am
J Clin Nutr. 1999;70(3)(suppl):532S-538S.

2. Kahn HA, Phillips RL, Snowdon DA, Choi W. Association between reported diet
and all-cause mortality: twenty-one-year follow-up on 27,530 adult Seventh-
Day Adventists. Am J Epidemiol. 1984;119(5):775-787.

3. Appleby PN, Key TJ, Thorogood M, Burr ML, Mann J. Mortality in British vegetarians.

Public Health Nutr. 2002;5(1):29-36.

4. Key TJ, Fraser GE, Thorogood M, et al. Mortality in vegetarians and non-
vegetarians: a collaborative analysis of 8300 deaths among 76,000 men and women
in five prospective studies. Public Health Nutr. 1998;1(1):33-41.

5. Key TJ, Fraser GE, Thorogood M, et al. Mortality in vegetarians and nonvegetar-
ians: detailed findings from a collaborative analysis of 5 prospective studies. Am
J Clin Nutr. 1999;70(3)(suppl):516S-524S.

6. Thorogood M, Mann J, Appleby P, McPherson K. Risk of death from cancer and
ischaemic heart disease in meat and non-meat eaters. BMJ. 1994;308(6945):
1667-1670.

7. Schatzkin A, Subar AF, Thompson FE, et al. Design and serendipity in establish-
ing a large cohort with wide dietary intake distributions: the National Institutes
of Health–American Association of Retired Persons Diet and Health Study. Am J
Epidemiol. 2001;154(12):1119-1125.

8. Thompson FE, Kipnis V, Midthune D, et al. Performance of a food-frequency ques-
tionnaire in the US NIH-AARP (National Institutes of Health–American Associa-
tion of Retired Persons) Diet and Health Study. Public Health Nutr. 2008;11
(2):183-195.

9. Beeson WL, Mills PK, Phillips RL, Andress M, Fraser GE. Chronic disease among
Seventh-day Adventists, a low-risk group: rationale, methodology, and descrip-
tion of the population. Cancer. 1989;64(3):570-581.

10. Sanjoaquin MA, Appleby PN, Thorogood M, Mann JI, Key TJ. Nutrition, lifestyle
and colorectal cancer incidence: a prospective investigation of 10998 vegetar-
ians and non-vegetarians in the United Kingdom. Br J Cancer. 2004;90(1):
118-121.

11. Appleby PN, Thorogood M, Mann JI, Key TJ. The Oxford Vegetarian Study: an

overview. Am J Clin Nutr. 1999;70(3)(suppl):525S-531S.

12. Appleby PN, Thorogood M, Mann JI, Key TJ. Low body mass index in non-meat
eaters: the possible roles of animal fat, dietary fibre and alcohol. Int J Obes Relat
Metab Disord. 1998;22(5):454-460.

13. Mann JI, Appleby PN, Key TJ, Thorogood M. Dietary determinants of isch-
aemic heart disease in health conscious individuals. Heart. 1997;78(5):450-
455.

14. Snowdon DA, Phillips RL, Fraser GE. Meat consumption and fatal ischemic heart

disease. Prev Med. 1984;13(5):490-500.

15. Kipnis V, Subar AF, Midthune D, et al. Structure of dietary measurement error:

results of the OPEN biomarker study. Am J Epidemiol. 2003;158(1):14-21.

16. Knize MG, Dolbeare FA, Carroll KL, Moore DH II, Felton JS. Effect of cooking time
and temperature on the heterocyclic amine content of fried beef patties. Food
Chem Toxicol. 1994;32(7):595-603.

17. Sinha R, Knize MG, Salmon CP, et al. Heterocyclic amine content of pork prod-
ucts cooked by different methods and to varying degrees of doneness. Food Chem
Toxicol. 1998;36(4):289-297.

18. Sinha R, Rothman N, Salmon CP, et al. Heterocyclic amine content in beef cooked

(REPRINTED) ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

570

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018by different methods to varying degrees of doneness and gravy made from meat
drippings. Food Chem Toxicol. 1998;36(4):279-287.

19. Skog K, Steineck G, Augustsson K, Jagerstad M. Effect of cooking temperature
on the formation of heterocyclic amines in fried meat products and pan residues.
Carcinogenesis. 1995;16(4):861-867.

20. Sugimura T, Wakabayashi K, Ohgaki H, Takayama S, Nagao M, Esumi H. Het-
erocyclic amines produced in cooked food: unavoidable xenobiotics. Princess
Takamatsu Symp. 1990;21:279-288.

21. Kazerouni N, Sinha R, Hsu CH, Greenberg A, Rothman N. Analysis of 200 food
items for benzo[a]pyrene and estimation of its intake in an epidemiologic study.
Food Chem Toxicol. 2001;39(5):423-436.

22. Hughes R, Cross AJ, Pollock JR, Bingham S. Dose-dependent effect of dietary meat

on endogenous colonic N-nitrosation. Carcinogenesis. 2001;22(1):199-202.

23. Cross AJ, Sinha R. Meat-related mutagens/carcinogens in the etiology of colo-

rectal cancer. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2004;44(1):44-55.

24. Kato I, Dnistrian AM, Schwartz M, et al. Iron intake, body iron stores and colo-
rectal cancer risk in women: a nested case-control study. Int J Cancer. 1999;
80(5):693-698.

25. Kabat GC, Miller AB, Jain M, Rohan TE. A cohort study of dietary iron and heme
iron intake and risk of colorectal cancer in women. Br J Cancer. 2007;97(1):
118-122.

26. Lee DH, Jacobs DR Jr, Folsom AR. A hypothesis: interaction between supple-
mental iron intake and fermentation affecting the risk of colon cancer: the Iowa
Women’s Health Study. Nutr Cancer. 2004;48(1):1-5.

27. Wurzelmann JI, Silver A, Schreinemachers DM, Sandler RS, Everson RB. Iron
intake and the risk of colorectal cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 1996;
5(7):503-507.

28. Bingham SA, Luben R, Welch A, Wareham N, Khaw KT, Day N. Are imprecise

methods obscuring a relation between fat and breast cancer? Lancet. 2003;
362(9379):212-214.

29. Thie´baut AC, Kipnis V, Chang SC, et al. Dietary fat and postmenopausal invasive
breast cancer in the National Institutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health Study
cohort. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99(6):451-462.

30. Midthune D, Kipnis V, Freedman LS, Carroll RJ. Binary regression in truncated
samples, with application to comparing dietary instruments in a large prospec-
tive study. Biometrics. 2008;64(1):289-298.

31. The World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research.
Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global
Perspective. Washington, DC: AICR; 2007.

32. Steffen LM, Kroenke CH, Yu X, et al. Associations of plant food, dairy product,
and meat intakes with 15-y incidence of elevated blood pressure in young black
and white adults: the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA)
Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;82(6):1169-1177.

33. Gascon A, Jacques H, Moorjani S, Deshaies Y, Brun LD, Julien P. Plasma lipo-
protein profile and lipolytic activities in response to the substitution of lean white
fish for other animal protein sources in premenopausal women. Am J Clin Nutr.
1996;63(3):315-321.

34. Wolmarans P, Benade AJ, Kotze TJ, Daubitzer AK, Marais MP, Laubscher R.
Plasma lipoprotein response to substituting fish for red meat in the diet. Am J
Clin Nutr. 1991;53(5):1171-1176.

35. Jacques H, Gascon A, Bergeron N, et al. Role of dietary fish protein in the regu-

lation of plasma lipids. Can J Cardiol. 1995;11(suppl G):63G-71G.

36. Sanders TA, Oakley FR, Miller GJ, Mitropoulos KA, Crook D, Oliver MF. Influ-
ence of n-6 versus n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in diets low in saturated fatty
acids on plasma lipoproteins and hemostatic factors. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol. 1997;17(12):3449-3460.

Correction

Error in Text. In the Original Investigation titled “Or-
egonians’ Reasons for Requesting Physician Aid in Dy-
ing” by Ganzini et al, published in the March 9 issue of
the Archives (2009;169[5]:489-492), an error occurred
in the text on page 490. In the first paragraph of the “Re-
sults” section, the last sentence should have appeared as
follows: “At death, 18 (44%) had received a prescrip-
tion for medication under the ODDA, and 9 (22%) died
by lethal ingestion.” Online versions of this article on
the Archives of Internal Medicine Web site were cor-
rected on March 9, 2009.

ARCH INTERN MED/ VOL 169 (NO. 6), MAR 23, 2009

WWW.ARCHINTERNMED.COM

571

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(REPRINTED WITH CORRECTIONS)

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018Cellular Proliferation, Apoptosis and

Angiogenesis: Molecular Targets for Nutritional

Preemption of Cancer

Cindy D. Davis, Nancy J. Emenaker, and John A. Milner

Malignant cells are characterized by abnormal signaling pathways involving proliferation, apoptosis,
and angiogenesis. These cancer centric pathways are known to be modiﬁed by several bioactive
dietary components, although admittedly there are inconsistencies in the response. The response
is dependent on the amount and duration of exposure to the dietary component and the cell type.
While caution should be exercised when extrapolating in vitro data to in vivo conditions, such
studies do provide valuable insights into plausible mechanisms. Signiﬁcant gene–nutrient and
nutrient–nutrient interactions may contribute to the uncertainty of the response to foods and/or
their components. One of the challenges is the identiﬁcation of which process(es), either singly or
in combination, is/are most important in leading to a dietary-mediated phenotypic change. The
dearth of controlled intervention studies that have investigated molecular targets for nutritional
preemption in humans make ﬁrm dietary recommendations difﬁcult. Until more deﬁnite informa-
tion surfaces, a balanced but varied diet is most prudent.
Semin Oncol 37:243-257. Published by Elsevier Inc.

Evidence continues to mount that altering dietary

habits is an effective and cost-efﬁcient approach
both for reducing cancer risk and for modifying
the biological behavior of tumors. The World Cancer
Research Fund/American Institute of Cancer Research
has estimated that cancer is 30% to 40% preventable by
appropriate food and nutrition, regular physical activ-
ity, and avoidance of obesity.1 On a global scale, they
have estimated that yearly about 3 to 4 million cancer
cases might be prevented by adherence to their recom-
mendations.1

While optimizing the intake of speciﬁc foods and/or
their bioactive components seems to be a practical,
noninvasive, and cost-effective strategy for reducing
the cancer burden, this is far from simple.2 The com-
plexity of the problem is evident in the literally thou-
sands of dietary compounds consumed each day.2,3 For
example, it is estimated that humans consume more
than 5,000 individual ﬂavonoids, yet only a few have
been examined for their cancer protective effects.2

Nutritional Science Research Group, Division of Cancer Prevention,

National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD.

Address correspondence to Cindy D. Davis, PhD, Nutritional Science
Research Group, Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute, 6130 Executive Blvd, Suite 3159, Rockville, MD 20892-
7328. E-mail: davisci@mail.nih.gov

0270-9295/ - see front matter
Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1053/j.seminoncol.2010.05.001

Furthermore, the lack of quantitative information about
some known food constituents limits the ability to
decipher which are most important. Unfortunately,
since many bioactive food components remain largely
uncharacterized, confusion can arise about the true
role of a food as a determinant of health and disease
prevention. Interactions, both synergistic and antago-
nistic, between food components may explain why
isolated components do not always behave identically
to intact foods.4 Finally, the composition of the entire
diet (pattern) may inﬂuence the magnitude of the re-
sponse to a bioactive food component and ultimately
cancer.4

Predictive, validated and sensitive biomarkers, in-
cluding those that (1) evaluate “intake” (exposure) to a
speciﬁc food or bioactive component; (2) assess one or
more speciﬁc biological responses (effect); and (3)
predict individual “susceptibility” as a function of nu-
trient–nutrient interactions and genetics, are funda-
mental to evaluating who will beneﬁt most or be
placed at risk from dietary interventions. These biomar-
kers must be readily accessible, easily and reliably as-
sayed, and predictive of a key process(es) involved in
cancer.

In addition to identifying bioactive dietary compo-
nents, it is critical to deﬁne the amount of the speciﬁc
bioactive component that is needed to achieve concen-
trations in target tissues that will lead to a phenotypic
change. The response to a food is determined not only

Seminars in Oncology, Vol 37, No 3, June 2010, pp 243-257

243

244

C.D. Davis, N.J. Emenaker, and J.A. Milner

Figure 1. The various phases of the cell cycle (G1, S, G2, and M), and the different cyclins and their cyclin-dependent kinases
(Cdks) that control progression through the cell cycle. Different dietary components act at different cell cycle checkpoints.
Some dietary components have been shown to have multiple molecular targets that can affect different phases of the cell cycle.
The speciﬁc molecular targets may depend on the speciﬁc type of cell being treated and the concentration being used. Arrows
indicate activation and blocked lines indicate inhibitory effects.

by the effective concentration of the bioactive food
component(s) reaching the target tissue but also the
amount of the target requiring modiﬁcation. Thus, this
threshold response to foods and their components can
vary substantially from individual to individual. Unfor-
tunately, most of current knowledge about food com-
ponents arises from cell culture studies and often with
nonphysiological concentrations. Thus, extrapolating
such data to humans needs is problematic, if not im-
possible.5

All of the major signaling pathways, which are de-
regulated in cancer, and which have been examined as
targets for cancer prevention, can be modiﬁed by one
or more dietary components. These include, but are
not limited to, carcinogen metabolism, DNA repair, cell
proliferation, apoptosis, inﬂammation, immunity, dif-
ferentiation, and angiogenesis.6 –13 Since multiple path-
ways may be inﬂuenced simultaneously, it is a daunting
challenge to determine which is most important in
determining cancer risk or tumor behavior.14 Determin-
ing the site of action can be further complicated by a
response which is cell type– dependent and inﬂuenced
by a potential myriad of nutrient–nutrient and nutri-
ent– gene interactions.

CELL PROLIFERATION

One of the hallmarks of cancer is aggressive prolif-
eration of cells. In normal cells, proliferation reﬂects a

ﬁnely controlled balance between growth-promoting
and growth-inhibiting signals. However, cancer cells
often acquire the capability of not only generating their
own growth signals, but also becoming insensitive to
growth-suppressing signals.15 Several proteins are rec-
ognized to be critical for cell cycle regulation including
the cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), CDK in-
hibitors (CDKIs), regulatory proteins (retinoblastoma
[Rb] and p53), and the E2F transcription factor (Figure
1). The progression of the cell cycle from one phase to
the next is regulated by sequential activation and
inactivation of “check points” that monitor the
cell’s status.16 These “check points” are mechanisms
whereby the cell actively halts progression through the
cell cycle until it can ensure that an earlier process,
such as DNA replication or mitosis, is complete. In
response to DNA damage, checkpoints can also trigger
the induction of necessary repair genes or cause the
cells to undergo programmed cell death or apoptosis.
The DNA damage checkpoint arrests cells in the G1, S,
or G2 phase depending on the cell cycle status of the
cell at the time damage was incurred.17

Mutations in genes that control the cell cycle are
common in human cancer. Rb and p53 are the two
main cell cycle control proteins frequently targeted in
tumorigenesis. Alterations occurring in each depend
on the tumor type18; virtually all human tumors dereg-
ulate either the Rb or p53 pathway, and many times
both proteins are inﬂuenced simultaneously.18

Molecular targets for nutritional preemption of cancer

245

Table 1. Examples of Bioactive Dietary Components That Inhibit Cell Proliferation*
Cell Line(s)

Dietary Agent

EGCG (epigallocatechin

gallate)
Genistein

Curcumin

Apigenin

Diallyl disulﬁde

Resveratrol

Quercetin

Sulforaphane
Silymarin

Ellagic acid

Methylseleninic acid
Sesamin

Molecular Target/Mechanism

2cyclin D, 2cyclin E, 2CDK1, 2CDK2,
2CDK4, 1pRB, 1p53
2cyclin B1, 2Cdc25c, 2Cdc2, 2cyclin
B, 1p21
2cyclin A, 2CDK1, 1p21
2cyclin D, 1p27
1cyclin B, 2CDK1, 1p53
1cyclin A, 1cyclin B, 1cyclin E,
1CDK2
2cyclin B, 2CDK1, 1p21, 1pRB

2CDK4, 2cyclin D, 1p21
2cyclin D, 2cyclin E, 2cyclin A,
2cyclin B, 2CDK2, 2Cdc2
2CDK2, 1p53, 1p21
2cyclin A, 2CDK2, 2CDK1, 1p21
2cyclin D, 2cyclin A

*Note that this table just contains select examples.

Concentration

Reference

MDA-MB-231
50–80 ␮g/mL
MDA-MB-231
0–20 ␮mol/L
T-24 bladder cells
0–40 ␮mol/L
DU-45, PC-3
0–40 ␮mol/L
HCT-116
0–400 ␮mol/L
SW-480
30 ␮mol/L
SK-BR3, MDA-MB-453,

MD-MBA-231

0–10 ␮mol/L
DU-145 ⬍1 ␮mol/L
PC-3, LNCap
90 ␮mol/L
T-24 bladder cells
1–50 ␮mol/L
PC-3 1–10 ␮mol/L
MCF-7
0–100 ␮mol/L

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26
27

28

29
30

Many bioactive dietary components can inhibit spe-
ciﬁc phases of the cell cycle (Figure 1, Table 1). The
effects can either be direct or indirect.31 For example,
epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) has been found to di-
rectly inhibit CDKs in various cancer cells (prostate,
lung, and skin),15 or indirectly by inducing the expres-
sion of p21 and p27 genes and inhibiting the expres-
sion of cyclin D1 and Rb phosphorylation; all this is
done in a dose- and time-dependent manner.32,33 Tumor
cells are generally more sensitive to the growth depres-
sion caused by food components than are normal cells.
For example, Park et al34 reported that EGCG induced
a dose-dependent inhibition of cell growth via a G0–G1
phase arrest in human osteosarcoma cells (MG-3 and
Saos-2) but did not inﬂuence normal rat osteoblasts.

Indole-3-carbinol (I3C) has recently been reported
to be a natural elastase enzymatic inhibitor and thus
disrupts cyclin E protein processing in some neoplastic
cells.35 This inhibition of cyclin E protein processing by
I3C enhances the occurrence of 50-kd cyclin E and less
of the lower molecular weight cyclin E typically occur-
ring in some tumors. This change leads to a downregu-
lation of CDK2 kinase activity and G1 cell cycle arrest in
human breast cancer cells. Moreover, the authors ob-
served that siRNA ablation of elastase production mim-

icked the cell cycle blockage caused by I3C, demon-
strating that the loss of elastase activity is sufﬁcient to
cause growth arrest.

Some dietary components may have multiple molec-
ular targets that can affect different phases of the cell
cycle. Resveratrol, a polyphenol found at high concen-
trations in red wine and grapes,
inhibits cell cycle
progression at different stages depending on the cell
examined.36,37 Treatment of LNCaP and PC-3 prostate
cancer cells with resveratrol (19 –150 ␮mol/L) reduced
the expression of cyclin D1, E, and CDK4, as well as
reducing cyclin D1/CDK4 kinase activity, and resulted
in a G1/S phase cell cycle arrest.36 It should be noted
that animal and human studies often ﬁnd plasma
resveratrol concentrations around 1 to 2 ␮mol/L,
raising issues about the physiological relevance of
these ﬁndings.38 In contrast, in HL-60 cells, resvera-
trol arrested cells at the S/G2 phase via an overex-
pression of cyclins A and E without modiﬁcation of
p21 expression.37

Sulforaphane is another dietary component that can
modulate different phases of the cell cycle. In DU-145
prostate cancer cells, sulforaphane at concentrations
less than 1 ␮mol/L induces a G0/G1 block via down-
regulation of the expression of cyclin D1 and CDK4.39

246

C.D. Davis, N.J. Emenaker, and J.A. Milner

Sulforaphane at concentrations of 15 ␮mol/L induces
cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase by increasing ex-
pression of cyclin B1 in human colon and breast cells.40
In HT-29 cells, this G2/M phase arrest was a conse-
quence of maintaining the cdc2kinase in its active de-
phosphorylated form, and was associated with phos-
phoryation/activation of Rb.41 In contrast, 20 ␮mol/L
sulforaphane treatment of either prostate PC-3 cells or
bladder UM-UC-3 cells causes reduced expression of
cyclin B1.42,43 Sulforaphane treatment of UM-UC-3 cells
also results in S phase arrest via reduced expression of
cyclin A.43

The cell cycle response caused by many bioactive
food components remains largely unexplored. It is
likely that for many the response may be similar to
what occurs when genistein is added to cultures such
that low exposures (0.5–1 ␮mol/L) increase prolife-
ration, whereas higher concentrations (50 ␮mol/L)
depress cell growth.44 Collectively, several studies
demonstrate that the ability of a bioactive dietary
component to alter cell proliferation depends on the
speciﬁc cell examined, as well as the concentration of
the test component.

Combinations of dietary components, rather than
individual agents, offer an exciting opportunity for
maximizing the response. EGCG (ⱖ50 ␮mol/L) and
␥-tocotrienol (ⱖ25 ␮mol/L) have been reported to
cause approximately 33% and 58% inhibition of cell
proliferation of MCF-7 cells, respectively, when added
independently.45 However, when each was provided at
10 ␮mol/L in combination, there was a signiﬁcant and
additive 70% reduction in cell proliferation.45 This sup-
pression was associated with downregulation of CDK4,
cyclin D1, and E2F. Similarly, 0.5 ␮mol/L resveratrol,
quercetin, and catechin had no effect on MDA-MB-231
cell proliferation when added individually, but when
combined at 0.5 ␮mol/L each, cell proliferation was
blocked in vitro.46 Furthermore, using in situ imaging
technologies it was discovered that combining these
dietary polyphenols reduced the growth of breast can-
cer xenografts in a nude mouse model.46

Although cell culture models are useful in obtaining
mechanistic insights, the observations obtained with
the in vitro models must be veriﬁed in vivo at physio-
logically relevant concentrations. One of the dietary
ﬂavonoids that has been examined both in vitro and in
vivo is apigenin. This ﬂavonoid is widely distributed in
fruits and vegetables, including onions, parsley, celery,
and oranges. In vitro studies with prostate cancer cells
found that apigenin causes a G0/G1 cell cycle arrest via
decreases in total Rb protein and its phosphorylation,
and decreased cyclin D1, D2, and E expression, as well
as their regulatory partners CDK2, 4, and 6.47 Similarly,
studies in mice have shown that apigenin resulted in a
dose-dependent downregulation of the growth of pros-
tate cancer cell xenografts that was associated with
decreased phosphorylation of Rb and the protein ex-

pression of cyclins D1, D2, and E, and CDK2, 4, and 6.48
These effects were observed at intakes of 20 ␮g per
mouse per day, which is similar to the median intake of
apigenin in humans of 40 to 50 mg/d.49

Curcumin is another dietary component whose in
vitro molecular targets are inﬂuenced in vivo. Bioavail-
ability data suggest that in vitro studies with curcumin
in the 10 ␮mol/L range or below are physiologically
relevant to humans.38 Treatment of either LNCaP or
PC-3 prostate cancer cells with 10 ␮mol/L curcumin
inhibited cyclin D1 and cyclin E and induced the CDK
inhibitors p16, p21, and p27.50 In rats, gavage admin-
istration of curcumin (200 or 600 mg/kg) inhibited
diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatic hyperplasia, possi-
bly by increasing p21 expression and decreasing the
expression of cyclin E and cdc2.51 Unfortunately, few
bioactive food components have been systematically
examined in both controlled and physiologically rele-
vant in vitro and in vivo studies.

Combinations of dietary components may also be
more efﬁcacious in vivo. For example, in an in vitro
model of oral cancer, EGCG blocked cells in the G0/G1
phase, while curcumin blocked in the G2/M phase of
the cell cycle. The combination appeared to be better
than either provided alone.52 Similarly, while tea or
curcumin individually decreased the number and vol-
ume of dimethylbenzanthracene-induced oral tumors
in hamsters, only the combination decreased the pro-
liferation index of squamous cell carcinoma.53 While
these combination studies are interesting, the dearth of
studies that have examined blends of bioactive food
components is troubling and clearly an area that de-
serves additional investigations.

Human intervention studies have documented that
some dietary components, such as calcium or low-fat
dairy foods54,55 or dietary ﬁber,56 can suppress colonic
or rectal epithelial cell proliferation in vivo. Unfortu-
nately, the molecular targets by which these dietary
components inﬂuence proliferation remain to be deter-
mined. A biomarker that is often used to measure cell
proliferation in humans is Ki-67. Recent studies have
demonstrated that neither the combination of 2 g/d
calcium and/or 800 IU vitamin D affected Ki-67 expres-
sion in normal colon mucosa57; neither prebiotics (re-
sistant starch), probiotics (Biﬁdobacterium lactis), or
synbiotics (their combination) altered Ki-67 expression
in rectal samples58; and the combination of a low-fat,
high-fruit and -vegetable diet with weight loss (⫺314
kcal, ⫺12.2% energy, ⫹1.8 servings/d fruits and vege-
tables, and ⫺4.0 kg weight) did not change Ki-67 ex-
pression in Barrett’s esophagus.59 The paucity of data in
humans that critically evaluate the effects of dietary
components on cell proliferation likely relates to the
difﬁculty in obtaining tissues noninvasively. Additional
studies are needed to identify surrogate tissues that

Molecular targets for nutritional preemption of cancer

247

may be predictive of the response observed in target
tissues.

APOPTOSIS

Apoptosis,

interchangeably referred to as pro-
grammed cell death, is a key pathway for regulating
homeostasis. In Greek apoptosis literally means “falling
away.” It is a natural, organized process that accounts
for approximately 3 billion cell deaths in the human
body every minute. It helps maintain a natural balance
between cell death and cell renewal by destroying
excess, damaged, or abnormal cells. Apoptosis is one of
the most potent defenses against cancer since this
process eliminates potentially deleterious, mutated
cells. Triggers for apoptosis induction include DNA
damage, disruption of the cell cycle, hypoxia, detach-
ment of cells from their surrounding tissue, and loss of
trophic signaling.60 It is characterized by cell shrinkage,

chromatin condensation, and fragmentation of the cell
into compact membrane-enclosed structures, called
“apoptotic bodies” that are engulfed by macrophges
and removed from the tissue in a controlled manner.61
These morphological changes are a result of character-
istic molecular and biochemical events occurring in the
cell, most notably the activation of proteolytic en-
zymes. Proteolytic cleavage of procaspases is an impor-
tant step leading to caspase activation, which in turn is
ampliﬁed by the cleavage and activation of other down-
stream caspases in the apoptosis cascade. Caspases are
a family of cysteinyl aspartate–speciﬁc proteases in-
volved in apoptosis and subdivided into initiation (8, 9,
and 10) and executioner (3, 6, and 7) caspases. There
are two main pathways of apoptosis: the extrinsic path-
way (death receptor pathway) and the intrinsic path-
way (mitochondrial pathway), which are activated
by caspase-8 and caspase-9, respectively (Figure 2). A
critical common element to both pathways is the

Figure 2. The two main pathways of apoptosis. The extrinsic pathway is activated at the cell surface when a speciﬁc ligand
binds to its corresponding cell-surface death receptor and activates caspase-8. The intrinsic or mitochondrial pathway occurs
when there is release of mitochondrial proteins leading to the activation of caspase-9. Both pathways converge in the activation
of caspase-3. Different dietary components can affect different molecular targets associated with apoptosis. Some dietary
components can act on multiple molecular targets depending on the speciﬁc type of cell being treated and the concentration
being used. Arrows indicate activation and blocked lines indicate inhibitory effects.

248

C.D. Davis, N.J. Emenaker, and J.A. Milner

Table 2. Examples of Bioactive Dietary Components That Induce the Extrinsic/Death Receptor Pathway
of Apoptosis*

Dietary Agent

Lupeol

Molecular Target/Mechanism
Increased Fas receptor and FADD protein

expression

Sulforaphane

Increased Fas ligand and cleavage of caspase-8

and caspase-3

Curcumin

Increased TRAIL-induced apoptosis via inhibition

of NF-␬B

Diindolylmethane

Increased TRAIL-induced apoptosis via

EGC or EGCG

downregulation of c-FLIP; increased caspase-8
cleavage

Caspase-8 activation and proteolytic cleavage of

Bid

Genistein

Decreased expression of TNF ligand and

receptor family

Cell Line(s)/
Concentration

LNCaP, CRW22Rv1
1–30 ␮mol/L
MDA-MB-231
15–25 ␮mol/L
LNCaP, PC-3
10–30 ␮mol/L
HepG2, HT-29
20 ␮mol/L

SH-SY5Y
50 ␮mol/L
SPC-A-A
20 ␮mol/L

Reference

62

63

64

65

66

67

*Note that this table just contains selected examples. Abbreviations: FADD, Fas (TNFRSF6)-associated death domain; TRAIL, tumor

necrosis factor-inducing ligand; EGCC, epigallocathechin-3 gallate; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

involvement of caspase-3, which results in cleavage
and inactivation of key cellular proteins including
the DNA repair enzyme poly(ADP-ribose) polymer-
ase (PARP). In addition, mitogenic and stress re-
sponse pathways are involved in the regulation of
apoptotic signaling.

Compelling evidence exists that bioactive dietary
components can trigger apoptosis though numerous
intracellular molecular targets in both apoptotic path-
ways in vitro (Figure 2, Tables 2 and 3). Distinct from
the apoptotic events in the normal physiological pro-
cess, which are mediated mainly by the interaction
between death receptors and their relevant ligands,79
many bioactive dietary components appear to induce
apoptosis through the mitochondria mediated pathway
by activating p53 and its target genes. For example,
EGCG induces the expression of p53 and its target BAX
in prostate cancer cells with wild-type p53 but not with
inactive p53.80 Similarly, resveratrol induces apoptosis
only in cells expressing wild-type p53 but not in p53-
deﬁcient cells.81 Many dietary compounds can induce
oxidative stress, which downregulates anti-apoptotic
molecules such as Bcl-2 or Bcl-x and upregulates pro-
apoptotic molecules such as Bax or Bak.82

Many dietary agents appear to exhibit some degree
of speciﬁcity for neoplastic cells, while sparing normal
cells. For example, 25 to 50 ␮mol/L quercetin signiﬁ-
cantly inhibited the growth of highly aggressive PC-3
and moderately aggressive DU-145 prostate cancer cell
lines but did not affect less aggressive LNCaP cells or
normal ﬁbrobasts.83

The concentration tested in cell culture studies de-
termines whether the agent is functioning nutritionally

or pharmacologically. For example, the concentrations
of EGCG needed to signiﬁcantly downregulate anti-
apoptotic proteins and induce programmed cell death
in vitro (20 ␮mol/L) are considerably greater than the
physiological concentrations that could be obtained by
typical tea consumption.84 Consumption of 6 to 7 cups
of green tea per day (⬃30 mg/kg/d EGCG) would
generate a plasma EGCG concentration of about 1
␮mol/L.84 However, to achieve higher plasma concen-
trations, EGCG supplements are needed.85 In contrast,
in humans, consumption of onions and applesauce
with peel resulted in peak plasma concentrations of
quercetin of 225 ⫾ 43 and 331⫾7 ␮mol/L, respec-
tively,86 which are signiﬁcantly greater than concen-
trations needed to induce apoptosis in vitro (30 –100
␮mol/L).87

Another important consideration is that combining
dietary components may promote additive and syner-
gistic effects on apoptosis induction. For example, res-
veratrol and quercetin combinations additively acti-
vated caspase-3 and cytochrome c release in a human
pancreatic cell line.88 Also, quercetin and ellagic acid
(at 5 and 10 ␮mol/L each), work synergistically to
induce apoptotis in human leukemia MOLT-4 cells.89

Selenium and vitamin E are yet another example of
synergistic beneﬁts of combining food components on
induction of apoptosis in human prostate cancer
cells.90 This synergy was accounted for primarily by
selenium and vitamin E modifying distinct signaling
pathways of caspase activation. Selenium activated
caspases-1 and -12, whereas vitamin E activated
caspase-9. Thus selenium and vitamin E in combination
may activate multiple molecular targets for apoptosis

Molecular targets for nutritional preemption of cancer

249

Table 3. Examples of Bioactive Dietary Components That Induce the Intrinsic/Mitochondrial Pathway of
Apoptosis*

Dietary Agent
Curcumin

Molecular Target/Mechanism

Mitochondrial swelling and collapse of the

mitochondrial membrane potential

Sulforaphane

Collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential,

activation of caspase-3, downregulation of
Bcl-2

Beta-carotene

Loss of mitochondrial membrane potential,

Genistein

EGCG

increased cytochrome c release, activation of
caspase-9

Decreased Bcl-2 and increased Bax mRNA and

protein expression

Decreased Bcl-2 and PARP cleavage and

increased Bax protein expression

Apigenin

Increased cytochrome c release and activation of

Luteolin

caspase-3 and -9; decreased Bcl-2 and
increased Bax protein

Activation of caspases-3 and -9 and PARP

cleavage

Diallyl disulﬁde Decreased mitochondrial membrane potential,

cytochrome c and Smac into the cytosol,
decreased Bcl-2 and some BIRC proteins,
activation of caspases-9 and -3

Selenium

Decreased mitochondrial membrane potential,

Resveratrol

release of cytochrome c into the cytosol,
activation of caspases-9 and -3

Cleavage of immature caspase-3 into active
fragments (p12, p17 andp20), increased
caspase-3 activity and PARP cleavage

Luteolin

Increased p63 and PIG3. Activation of caspase-9

and caspase-3

*Note that this table just contains selected examples.

Cell Line(s)/
Concentration

Reference

HepG2
0–40 ␮g/mL
U937
0–4 ␮mol/L

HL-60, HT-29, SK-MEL-2
0–20 ␮mol/L

SG7901 cells injected into

nude mice

0.5–1.5 mg/kg diet
MDA-MB-231
50 ␮g/mL
22Rv1
10–80 ␮mol/L

SCC-4
0–100 ␮mol/L
T98G and U87MG
100 ␮mol/L

LNCaP
2.5 ␮mol/L

MD-MB-231
50 ␮mol/L

KYSE-510
10–80 ␮mol/L

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

induction, the endoplasmic reticulum stress/cytokine
signaling pathway and mitochondrial pathway, respec-
tively. By targeting the entire battery of
initiator
caspases, selenium and vitamin E in combination may
act in a cooperative fashion to “switch on the full force
of the apoptotic machinery.”90 These studies suggest
that combinations of bioactive food components with
different sites of action can potentially induce synergis-
tic apoptotic effects.91

Studies in human subjects have documented that
dietary components can induce apoptosis. Thirty-two
patients diagnosed by biopsy with prostate cancer
were given tomato sauce pasta entrées (30 mg lyco-
pene per day) for 3 weeks before prostatectomy.92
Tomato sauce consumption resulted in a signiﬁcant
increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells in benign
prostatic hyperplasia (from 0.66 ⫾ 0.13% to 1.38 ⫾

0.31%) and in carcinomas (0.84 ⫾ 0.13% to 2.76 ⫾
0.58%). This increase was associated with decreased
Bax expression in the carcinomas.92 Similarly, 18 men
with prostate cancer who consumed 160 mg/d of red
clover– derived isoﬂavones, containing a mixture of
genistein, daidzen, formononectin, and biochanin A,
prior to prostatectomy had a signiﬁcantly higher per-
centage of apoptotic cells (1.14%) compared to un-
supplemented controls (0.24%).93 Dietary components
also have been shown to modify apoptosis in the rectal
epithelium of human subjects. Patients with adenomas
in the highest versus lowest tertile of calcium intake
(⬍420 v ⬎739 mg/d) had 3.4 times higher odds of
elevated apoptotic scores (mean number of apoptotic
cells per crypt).94 While these data are intriguing, ad-
ditional human studies are needed to determine
whether other dietary components, at physiologically

250

C.D. Davis, N.J. Emenaker, and J.A. Milner

or pharmacologically relevant concentrations, modu-
late speciﬁc apopotic molecular targets.

ANGIOGENESIS

Angiogenesis is a normal physiological process
where new blood vessels grow from pre-existing ones.
While angiogenesis occurs during growth and wound
healing, it can also indicate that a tumor has possibly
changed from a benign to a malignant state. While
enhanced angiogenesis promotes tumor growth by in-
creasing oxygen and nutrient delivery, accumulating
evidence suggests that this process occurs early in
cancer development and thus occurs as a result of
signals arising from transformed cells. Angiogenesis in
malignant tumors is a complex process that involves
the tight interplay of cancerous cells and their micro-
environment including surrounding endothelial cells,
phagocytes and their pro- and inhibitory secreted fac-
tors. Premalignant and malignant cells both exhibit
increasing levels of cellular and molecular angiogenic
dysregulation, advancing their malignant phenotypes.
This contributes to their ability to produce pro-angio-
genic molecules, as well as to the ability of the sur-
rounding stroma to initiate pathologic-angiogenesis by
paracrine microenvironmental inﬂuences acting upon
endothelial cells. Endothelial cells are stimulated and
are attracted to the site where the new blood supply is
needed by various chemoattractants including growth

factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), ﬁbroblast growth factor (FGF), and insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and by inﬂammatory mole-
cules including interleukin (IL)-8, COX-2 and inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS).95,96 Chemotactic migra-
tion is potentiated by the degradation of extracellular
matrix components.97 This is accomplished via matrix-
metalloproteinases (MMPs).98,99 MMPs include collag-
enases (MMP-1, MMP-8, and MMP-13), gelatinases
(MMP-2 and MMP-9), stromelysins (MMP-3, MMP-10,
and MMP-7) and elastase (MMP-12).100

The expression of MMPs is predominately regulated
by the AP-1 transcription complex, which can be acti-
vated by several mechanisms involving growth factors,
cell– cell interactions, and interactions among cells and
matrix.101 In addition, there are natural MMP inhibitors
(tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases, TIMPs), that
are also involved in regulating the activation and activ-
ity of these enzymes. MMPs are involved in many phys-
iological processes involving matrix remodeling, and
appear to be critical in angiogenesis, tumor cell inva-
sion, and metastasis. In addition to removing physical
barriers to migration through degradation of the extra-
cellular matrix, MMPs can modulate cell adhesion, and
generate extracellular matrix degradation products that
are chemotactic for endothelial cells.

Inhibition of angiogenesis serves two functions: (1)
it limits tumor size by restricting oxygen and nutrients,

Figure 3. Angiogenesis. Endothelial cells are stimulated and are attracted to the site where a new blood supply is needed by
various growth factors. Different dietary components can affect different molecular targets associated with angiogenesis. Some
dietary components can act on multiple molecular targets depending on the speciﬁc type of cell being treated and the
concentration being used. Arrows indicate activation and blocked lines indicate inhibitory effects.

Molecular targets for nutritional preemption of cancer

251

Table 4. Examples of Bioactive Dietary Components That Inhibit Angiogenesis*102–104

Dietary Agent
Allyl Isothiocyante

Apigenin

Berry extracts
Capsaicin

Conjugated linoleic

acid

Curcumin

EGCG

Genistein

Grape seed

procyanidins

Indole-3-carbinol

Effect on Angiogenesis

Downregulates VEGF and proinﬂammatory cytokines (IL-1␤, IL-6, and TNF␣),

upregulates IL-2 and TIMP

Inhibits HIF-1␣ and VEGF expression in human ovarian cancer cells Inhibits in

vitro angiogenesis.

Inhibition of VEGF expression in human keratinocytes
Inhibits VEGF-induced chemotactic motility and capillary-like tube formation of

primary endothelial cells

Inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo by suppression of formation of

microcapillary networks Suppression of both serum and mammary gland
VEGF concentrations in breast cancer model

Downregulates transcript levels of VEGF and bFGF and suppresses VEGF, MMP-

2 and MMP-9 expression, NF-␬B, COX-2, and MAPKs activity Inhibits
microvessels density in tumor xenografts

Inhibits growth and survival of endothelial cells Suppresses tumor vasculature in

tumor xenograft models Suppresses ERK1/2 activity and inhibits VEGF
expression and secretion in cancer cells Suppresses MMP-2/9 expression and
activation in the TRAMP model, along with inhibition of COX-2, iNOS and
NF-␬B in other tumor models

Downregulates MMP-9 and upregulates TIMP-1 Suppresses endothelial cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion Inhibits VEGF and COX-2 expression
and suppresses VEGF-induced tyrosine phosporylation of receptor kinases

Inhibits growth, survival, migration and matrigel invasion of HUVEC Decreases

VEGF expression and microvessel density in tumor xenograft model

Decreases VEGF and Flk-1 expression in endothelial cells. Inhibits growth of

HUVEC and inhibits in vitro angiogenesis in matrigel Decreases iNOS
expression

Inositol hexaphosphate

Decreases VEGF expression and microvessel density in tumor xenograft model

Luteolin
Phenylethyl

isothiocyanate

Quercetin

Resveratrol

Retinoic acid
Selenium

Silibinin

Inhibits growth, survival, migration and matrigel invasion of HUVEC

Inhibition of VEGF-induced proliferation of HUVEC
Inhibits VEGF secretion and lowers VEGF-R expression Lowers survival rate of
HUVEC cells, inhibits capillary-like tube formation and migration of HUVEC
cells

Inhibits MMP-2 and MMP-9 secretion from tumor cells and suppresses

endothelial cell proliferation, migration and tube formation

Inhibits capillary-like tube formation by HUVEC and capillary diffentiation and

VEGF binding to HUVEC Decreases iNOS and VEGF expression

Inhibits responsiveness of endothelial cells to angiogenic growth factors
Suppresses VEGF expression, lowers microvessel density and inhibits genolytic

activity of MMP-2 in rat mammary carcinoma Initiates apoptotic death in
HUVEC cells

Inhibits growth and survival of endotheial cells via disrupting VEGF and IGF-1
signaling Inhibits MMP-2 expression and tube formation in HUVEC Inhibits
VEGF secretion from human cancer cells Decreases iNOS and VEGF expression
and microvessel density in mouse lung tumors

*Additional information can be obtained from recent reviews on dietary modiﬁcation of angiogenesis.102–104

and (2) it decreases the opportunities for metastatic
cells to enter the circulatory system. Several dietary
components have surfaced as inhibitors of angiogene-
sis in various animal and cell culture models (Figure 3,
Table 4).102–104 Speciﬁcally, they appear to possess a

wide range of angiopreventive properties by modifying
including inﬂammation,105–116
pro-angiogenic stimuli,
cytokine and growth factor production,111,117–122 endo-
thelial cell function,123–126 and/or intracellular and ex-
tracellular communications.127–131

252

C.D. Davis, N.J. Emenaker, and J.A. Milner

During inﬂammation, nuclear factor (NF)-␬B and
STAT3 stimulate production of pro-angiogenic cyto-
kines and growth factors by inﬁltrating host immune
cells. These growth factors and cytokines (eg, IL-6, IL-8,
and VEGF) can then trigger vascular endothelial cell
proliferation and migration. Some bioactive food com-
ponents appear to reduce inﬂammatory-induced an-
giogenesis by one or more mechanisms, including
inhibition of pro-inﬂammatory NF-␬B and STAT3 sig-
naling pathways. Preclinical evidence suggests cap-
saicin,108,109 resveratrol,110 and curcumin111,112 target
both NF-␬B and STAT3 signaling pathways for block-
age, while other evidence suggests some bioactive food
components may inhibit either the NF-␬B or STAT3
pathway but not both.111 Curcumin treatement re-
IL-1␤, and tumor necrosis factor
duced IL-6,
(TNF)␣ mRNA expression levels by upregulating mito-
gen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-5 activities in
primary human prostatic epithelial cells and prostate
lines.118 Clinical studies have shown re-
cancer cell
duced STAT3 phosphorylation in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from pancreatic cancer patients re-
ceiving 8 g/d of oral curcumin.112

IL-8,

Bioactive food components (eg, ﬂaxseed lignans,
black raspberries, and capsaicin) may reduce growth
factor expression levels such as VEGF. Enterodiol and
enterolactone, two major mammalian lignan metabo-
lites from ﬂaxseed, have been reported to reduce ex-
tracellular VEGF expression by approximately 50% and
to signiﬁcantly reduce microvesseal density in an
MCF-7 xenograph mouse model of premenopausal
breast cancer.119 Feeding a 5% freeze-dried black rasp-
berry powder
reduced carcinogen-induced
VEGF-C mRNA expression from the 2.4-fold increase
observed in control animals treated with nitrosometh-
ylbenzylamine (NMBA) alone down to a 1.1-fold in-
crease in animals treated with NMBA plus BRB. This
decrease was associated with suppression of esopha-
geal endothelial microvessel density (22.6 ⫾ 2.6 ves-
sels/cm in NMBA plus BRB compared to 53.7 ⫾ 5.6
vessels/cm in NMBA-treated control animals).120 Sup-
pression of in vivo VEGF secretion by bioactive food
components may relate to their ability to inhibit H2O2-
induced VEGF expression.122

(BRB)

The proliferation and migration of vascular endothe-
lium is fundamental to angiogenesis and is modiﬁed by
several growth factors and cytokines that trigger these
pro-angiogenic processes. Preclinical evidence sug-
gests that some bioactive food components signiﬁ-
cantly inhibit endothelial cell proliferation and migra-
tion in both in vitro and in vivo models of angiogenesis.
Capsaicin inhibited VEGF-induced cell proliferation of
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) by
downregulating cyclin D1 expression and DNA synthe-
sis in a dose-dependent manner.123 Capsaicin also ex-
erted a dose-dependent inhibitory effect on VEGF-
induced endothelial cell migration, capillary tube

formation, and VEGF-induced phosphorylation of AKT
and endothelial NOS (eNOS).123 This is intriguing since
the AKT/nitric oxide pathway is necessary for the
VEGF-induced vessel generation that results from endo-
thelial cell migration, proliferation and tube formation.
Dietary components also may play an important role
as modiﬁers of intracellular and extracellular commu-
nication. Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1␣ is a tran-
scription factor that responds to changes in available
oxygen to promote the formation of new blood vessels.
Resveratrol inhibits HIF-1␣ and VEGF cellular protein
expression levels by downregulating AKT and MAPK
pathways and induces HIF-1␣proteosomal degradation
through the 26S proteasome system in A2780/CP70
and OVCAR-3 human ovarian cancer cells.129 Similar
effects with resveratrol and EGCG have been observed
in human tongue squamous cell carcinomas (SCC-9)
and hepatoma (HepG2) cells.130,131

While supplementation with speciﬁc bioactive com-
ponents has been shown to inhibit angiogenesis, ex-
perimental ﬁndings provide strong evidence that en-
ergy restriction can suppress tumor angiogenesis in
prostate tumor models as well as in an orthotopic
mouse brain tumor model involving intracerebral im-
plantation of a syngeneic malignant mouse astrocy-
toma.132,133 A recent study in rats implanted with pro-
state cancer cells demonstrated that a 40% caloric
restriction reduced serum concentrations of IGF-1 by
35%, VEGF mRNA by 30%, and secreted VEGF protein
by 33% compared to control animals.134 Moreover, in
vitro studies with the prostate cancer cells demon-
strated dose- and time-dependent stimulation of VEGF
expression by IGF-1. These results suggest that dietary
restriction reduces endocrine and prostate tumor auto-
cine/paracrine IGF-1 expression, which contribute to
reduced VEGF expression and signaling, to inhibit tu-
mor angiogenesis associated with prostate tumorigen-
esis.134

While many dietary components have the ability to
inhibit tumor angiogenesis, this process is fundamental
also to healing of wounds, acute injury, and chronic
damages of the gastrointestinal mucosa. Thus, potential
deleterious effects might arise from strategies aimed at
suppressing cancer-related angiogenesis. Undeniably, a
better understanding of the differential effects of di-
etary components on tumor versus physiological angio-
genesis is critical.

SUMMARY

Dietary behavior is one of the most important and
modiﬁable determinants of cancer risk and tumor be-
havior. Overwhelming evidence documents that a va-
riety of dietary components can markedly inﬂuence a
number of key intracellular targets that are associated
with cancer. Unraveling the role of bioactive food com-
ponents is complicated by the multiple steps in the

Molecular targets for nutritional preemption of cancer

253

cancer process which can be modiﬁed simultaneously,
including cell proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogene-
sis, the number of bioactive food components and the
importance of dosage and timing in determining the
magnitude of the response. Undeniably, greater atten-
tion needs to be given to the dose and duration of
exposures needed to bring about a biologically relevant
response without creating ill consequences. Intriguing
evidence with combinations of food components sug-
gest the beneﬁts may be far greater than when pro-
vided individually.

It is clear that not all individuals respond equally to
the intake of foods or their speciﬁc bioactive food
components.135 Unquestionably, bioactive food com-
ponents can help maintain normal cell function as well
as serve as a deterrent to the behavior of abnormal
(cancerous) cells. Possibly both are critical for maxi-
mum cancer prevention. Regardless, a better under-
standing of genetic factors, including those associated
with nutrigenetic, epigenetic, transcriptomic, pro-
teomic and metabolomic activities, is essential to de-
termine who will beneﬁt most or might be placed at
risk due to dietary intervention strategies. Greater
knowledge about the molecular targets for bioactive
food components that builds on “-omics” technologies
will help us to understand why some individuals ap-
pear to be more responsive to dietary change than
others.

Several bioactive food components serve as regula-
tors of gene expression and/or modulate gene prod-
ucts. At least some evidence suggests the response may
relate to the ability of these compounds to serve as
prooxidants rather than antioxidants.136,137 Transcrip-
tomic proﬁles following a bolus challenge of a food
component may provide important clues about the
merits of dietary change and plausible mechanisms that
underlie the beneﬁcial or adverse effects of dietary
components. Periodic transcriptomic or metabolomic
proﬁles should also assist with the identiﬁcation of
genes and related events markers that are altered by
food components in the pre-and post-disease states.

Unraveling the multitude of interactions among the
more than 25,000 bioactive food components with key
cancer-related events makes for a daunting challenge.
Nevertheless, deciphering the role of dietary habits is
fundamental to optimizing health and ultimately dis-
ease prevention. Access to this information will help
resolve the inconsistencies within the literature and
provide clues to strategies to assist individuals in pre-
venting cancer.

REFERENCES

1. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for
Cancer Research. Food nutrition, physical activity and
the prevention of cancer: a global perspective; Wash-
ington, DC.

2. Milner JA. Molecular targets for bioactive food compo-

nents. J Nutr. 2004;134:2492s– 8s.

3. Liu RH. Health beneﬁts of fruit and vegetables are from
additive and synergistic combinations of phytochemi-
cals. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;78:517S–20S.

4. Davis CD. Nutritional interactions: credentialing of mo-
lecular targets for cancer prevention. Exp Biol Med.
2007;232:176 – 83.

5. Liu RH. Health beneﬁts of fruit and vegetables are from
additive and synergistic combinations of phytochemi-
cals. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;78:517s–20s.

6. Yu S, Kong A-N. Targeting carcinogen metabolism by
dietary cancer preventive compounds. Current Cancer
Drug Targets. 2007;5:416 –24.

7. Mathers JC, Coxhead JM, Tyson J. Nutrition and DNA
repair-potential molecular mechanisms of action. Cur-
rent Cancer Drug Targets. 2007;5:425–31.

8. Encisco JM, Hirschi KK. Nutrient regulation of tumor
and vascular endothelial cell proliferation. Current Can-
cer Drug Targets. 2007;5:432–7.

9. Martin KR. Using nutrigenomics to evaluate apoptosis
as a preemptive target in cancer prevention. Current
Cancer Drug Targets. 2007;5:438 – 46.

10. Surh YJ, Kundu JK. Cancer preventive phytochemicals
as speed breakers in inﬂammatory signaling involved in
aberrant COX-2 expression. Current Cancer Drug Tar-
gets. 2007;5:447–58.

11. Ferguson LR, Philpot, M. Cancer prevention by dietary
the immune re-
bioactive components that
sponse. Current Cancer Drug Targets. 2007;5:459 – 64.
12. Singh RP, Agarwal R. Inducible nitric oxide synthase-
vascular endothelial growth factor axis: a potential tar-
get to inhibit tumor angiogenesis by dietary agents.
Current Cancer Drug Targets. 2007;5:475– 83.

target

13. Davis CD, Milner JA. Molecular targets for nutritional
preemption of cancer. Current Cancer Drug Targets.
2007;5:410 –5.

14. Sarkar FH, Li Y. Targeting multiple signal pathways by
chemopreventive agents for cancer prevention and
therapy Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2007;28:1305–15.

15. Hanahan D, Weinburg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.

Cell. 2000;100:57–70.

16. Meeran SM, Katiyar SK. Cell cycle control as a basis for
cancer chemoprevention through dietary agents. Fron-
tiers Biosci. 2008;13:2191–202.

17. Mailand N, Falck J, Lukas C, et al. Rapid destruction of
human Cdc25A in response to DNA damage. Science.
2000;288:1425–9.

18. Macaluso M, Montanari M, Cinti C, Giordano A. Modu-
lation of cell cycle components by epigenetic and ge-
netic events. Semin Oncol. 2005;32:452–7.

19. Thangapazham RL, Singh AK, Sharma A, Warren J, Gad-
dipati JP, Maheshwai RK. Green tea polyphenols and its
constituent epigallocatechin gallate inhibits prolifera-
tion of human breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.
Cancer Lett. 2007;245:232– 41.

20. Li Z, Li J, Mo B, Hu C, et al. Genistein induces G2/M cell
cycle arrest via stable activation of ERK ½ pathway in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Cell Bio Toxicol.
2008;24:401–9.

21. Park C, Kim GY, Kim GD, Choi BT, Park YM, Choi YH.
Induction of G2/M arrest and inhibition of cyclooxya-

254

C.D. Davis, N.J. Emenaker, and J.A. Milner

genase-2 activity by curcumin in human bladder cancer
T24 cell. Oncol Rep. 2006;15:1225–31.

22. Shukla S, Gupta S. Apigenin suppresses insulin-like
growth factor 1 receprot signaling in human prostate
cancer: an in vitro and in vivo study. Mol Carcinog.
2009;48:243–52.

23. Song JD, Lee SK, Kim KM, et al. Molecular mechanism
of diallyl disulﬁde in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in
HCT-116 colon cancer cells. J Biochem Mol Toxicol.
2009;23:71–9.

24. Colin D, Gimazane A, Lizard G, et al. Effects pf resvera-
trol analogs on cell cycle progression, cell cycle asso-
ciated proteins and 5ﬂuoro-uracil sensitivity in human
derived colon cancer cells. Int J Cancer. 2009;124:
2780 – 8.
Jeong JH, An JY, Kwon YT, Rhee JG, Lee YJ. Effects of
low dose quercetin: cancer cell-speciﬁc inhibition of
cell cycle progression. J Cell Biochem. 2009;106:73–82.

25.

26. Wang L, Liu D, Ahmed T, Chung FL, Conaway C, Chiao
JW. Targeting cell cycle machinery as a molecular
mechanism of sulforaphane in prostate cancer preven-
tion. Int J Cancer. 2004;24:187–92.

27. Deep G, Oberlies NH, Kroll DJ, Agarwal R. Identifying
the differential effects of silymarin constituents on cell
growth and cell cycle regulatory molecules in human
prostate cancer cells. Int J Cancer. 2008;123:41–50.

28. Li TM, Chen GW, Su CC, et al. Ellagic acid induced
p53/p21 expression, G1 arrest and apoptosis in human
bladder T24 cells. Anticancer Res. 2005;25:971–9.

29. Dong Y, Zhang H, Hawthorn L, Ganther HE, Ip C.
Delineation of the molecular basis for selenium-induced
growth arrest in human prostate cancer cells by oligo-
nucleotide array. Cancer Res. 2003;63:52–9.

30. Yokota T, Matsuzaki Y, Koyama M, et al. Sesamin, a
lignan of sesame, down-regulates cyclin D1 protein
expression in human tumor cells. Cancer Sci. 2007;98:
1447–553.

31. Fresco P, Borges F, Diniz C, Marques MP. New insights
on the anticancer properties of dietary polyphenols.
Med Res Rev. 2006;26:747– 66.

32. Semczuk A, Jakowicki JA. Alterations of pRB1-cyclin
D1-cdk4/6-p16(INK4A) pathway in endometrial carci-
nogenesis. Cancer Lett. 2004;203:1–12.

33. Shankar S, Suthakar G, Srivastava RK. Epigallocatechin-
3-gallate inhibits cell cycle and induces apoptosis in
pancreatic cancer. Front Biosci. 2007;12:5039 –51.

34. Park H, Han D, Park YH, Park J. Differential biological
responses of green tea polyphenol in normal cells vs.
cancer cells. Curr Appl Phys. 2005;5:449 –52.

indole-3-carbinol

35. Nguyen HH, Aronchik I, Brar GA, et al. The dietary
phytochemical
is a natural elastase
enzymatic inhibitor that disrupts cyclin E protein pro-
cessing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:19750 –5.
36. Benitz DA, Pozo-Guisado E, Alvarez-Barrientos A, Fer-
nandez-Salguero PM, Castellon EA. Mechanisms in-
volved in resveratrol-induced apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest in prostate cancer derived cell lines. J Androl.
2007;28:282–93.

37. Suh N, Luyengi L, Fong HH, Kinghorn AD, Pezzuto JM.
Discovery of natural product chemopreventive agents
using HL-60 cell differentiation as a model. Anticancer
Res. 1995;15:233–39.

38. Howell LM, Moiseeva EP, Neal CP, et al. Predicting the
physiological relevance of in vitro cancer preventive
activities of phytochemicals Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2007;
28:1274 –304.

39. Wang L, Liu D, Ahmed T, Chun FL, Conaway C, Chiao
JW. Targeting cell cycle machinery as a molecular
mechanism of sulforaphane in prostate cancer preven-
tion. Int J Oncol. 2004;24:187–92.
Jackson SJ, Singletary KW. Sulforaphane inhibits human
MCF-7 mammary cancer cell mitotic progression and
tubulin polymerization. J Nutr. 2004;134:2229 –36.

40.

41. Parnaud G, Li P, Cassar G, et al. Mechanism of sulfora-
phane-induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human
colon cancer cells Nutr Cancer. 2004;48:198 –206.

42. Singh SV, Herman-Antosiewicz A, Singh AV, et al. Sul-
foraphane-induced G2/M phase cell cycle arrest in-
volves checkpoint kinase 2-mediated phosphorylation
of cell division cycle 25C J Biol Chem. 2004;279:
25813–22.

43. Tang L, Zhang Y. Mitochondria are the primary target in
isothiocyanate-induced apoptosis in human bladder
cancer cells Mol Cancer Ther. 2005;4:1250 –9.

44. El Toumy LH, Banerfee PP. Identiﬁcation of a biphasic
role for genistein in the regulation of prostate cancer
growth and metastasis. Cancer Res. 2009;69:3695–703.
45. Hsieh TC, Wu JM. Suppression of cell proliferation and
gene expression by combinatorial synergy of EGCG,
resveratrol and ␥-tocotrienol in estrogen receptor-posi-
tive MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Int J Oncol. 2008;33:
851–9.

46. Schlachterman A, Valle F, Wall KM, et al. Combined
resveratrol, quercetin, and catechin treatment reduces
breast tumor growth in a nude mouse model. Transl
Oncol. 2008;1:19 –27.

47. Shukla S, Gupta S. Apigenin-induced cell cycle arrest is
mediated by modulation of MAPK, P13K-Akt, and loss
of cyclin D1 associated retinoblastoma dephosphoryla-
tion in human prostate cancer cells. Cell Cycle. 2007;
6:1102–14.

48. Shukla S, Gupta S. Molecular targets for apigenin-in-
duced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in prostate cancer
cell xenograft. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006;4:843–52.

49. Hollman PC, Katan MB. Health effects and bioavailabil-
ity of dietary ﬂavanols. Free Radic Res. 1999;S1:75– 80.
50. Srivastava RK, Chen Q, Siddiqui I, Sarva K, Shankar S.
Linkage of curcumin-induced cell cycle arrest and apo-
ptosis by cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21/WAF1/CIP1.
Cell Cycle. 2007;6:2953– 61.

51. Chuang SE, Cheng AL, Lin JK, Kuo ML. Inhibition by
curcumin of dietylnitrosamine-induced hepatic hyper-
plasi,
inﬂammation, cellular gene products and cell-
cycle-related proteins in rats. Food Chem Toxicol.
2000;38:991–5.

52. Khaﬁf A, Schantz SP, Chou TC, Edelstein D, Sacks PG.
Quantittation of chemopreventive synergism between
(⫺)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate and curcumin in normal,
premalignant and malignant human oral epithelial cells
Carcinogenesis. 1998;19:419 –24.
53. Lin N, Chen X, Liao J, et al.

Inhibition of 7,12-
dimethylbenz{a}antrhracene (DMBA)-induced oral car-
cinogenesis in hamsters by tea and curcumin. Carcino-
genesis. 2002;23:1307–13.

Molecular targets for nutritional preemption of cancer

255

54. Holt PR, Wolper C, Moss SF, Yang K, Lipkin M. Com-
parison of low-fat dairy foods on epithelial cell prolif-
eration and differentiation. Nutr Cancer. 2001;41:
150 –5.

55. Rozen P, Lubin F, Papo N, et al. Calcium supplements
interact signiﬁcantly with long-term diet while sup-
pressing rectal epithelial proliferation of adenoma pa-
tients. Cancer. 2001;91:833– 40.

56. Weerasooriya V, Rennie MJ, Anant S, et al. Dietary ﬁber
decreases colonic epithelial cell proliferation and pro-
tein synthetic rates in human subjects. Am J Physiol
Endocrinol Metab. 2006;290:E1104 – 8.

57. Fedirko V, Bostick RM, Flanders WD, et al. Effects of
vitamin D and calcium on proliferation and differentia-
tion in normal colon mucosa: a randomized clinical
trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009;18:
2933– 41.

58. Worthley DL, Le Leu RK, Conlon M, et al. A human,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial of pre-
biotic, probiotic, and synbiotic supplementation: ef-
fects on luminal, inﬂammatory, epigenetic, and epithe-
lial biomarkers of colorectal cancer. Am J Clin Nutr.
2009;90:578 – 86.

59. Kristal AR, Blount PL, et al. Low-fat, high fruit and
vegetable diets and weight loss do not affect biomark-
ers of cellular proliferation in Barrett esophagus. Can-
cer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005;14:2377– 83.

60. Sun SY, Hail N, Lotan R. Apoptosis as a novel target for
cancer chemoprevention. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96:
662–72.

61. Rodriguez M, Schaper J. Apoptosis: measurement and

technical issues. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005;38:15–20.

62. Saleem M, Kweon MH, Yun JM, et al. A novel dietary
triterpene leueol induces fas-mediated apoptotic death
of androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells and inhibits
tumor growth in a xenograft model. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:11203–13.

63. Pledgie-Tracy A, Sobolewski MD, Davidson NE. Sulfora-
phane induces cell type-speciﬁc apoptosis in human
breast cancer cell lines. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;6:1013–21.
64. Deeb D, Jiang H, Gao X, et al. Curcumin [1,7-Bis(4-
hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1– 6-heptadine-3,5-dione]
sensitizes human prostate cancer cells to tumor necro-
sis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand/Apo2L-in-
duced apoptosis by suppress8ing nuclear factor-6B via
inhibition of the prosurivial Akt signaling pathway.
J Pharmacol Experimental Ther. 2007;321:616 –25.
65. Zhang S, Shen HM, Ong CN. Down-regulation of c-FLIP
contributes to the sensitization effect of 3,3=-diindolyl-
methane on TRAIL-induced apoptosis in cancer cells.
Mol Cancer Ther. 2005;4:1972– 81.

66. Das A, Banik NL, Ray SK. Mechanism of apoptosis with
the involvement of calpain and caspase cascades in
human malignant neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells ex-
posed to ﬂavonoids. Int J Cancer. 2006;119:2575– 85.
67. Zou H, Zhan S, Cao K. Apoptotic activity of genistein on
human lung adenocarcinoma SPC-A-1 cells and prelim-
inary exploration of its mechanisms using microarray.
Biomed Pharmacother. 2008;62:583–9.

68. Cao J, Liu Y, Zhou HM, et al. Curcumin induces apo-
through mitochondrial hyperpolization and

ptosis

mtDNA damage in human hepatoma G2 cells. Free
Radic Med Biol. 2007;43:968 –75.

69. Choi WY, Choi BT, Lee WH, Choi YH. Sulforaphane
generates reactive oxygen species leading to mitochon-
drial perturbation for apoptosis in human leukemia
U937 cells. Biomed Pharmacother. 2008;62:637– 44.

70. Palozza P, Serini S, Torsello A, et al. Mechanisms of
activation of caspase cascade during beta-carotene-in-
duced apoptosis in human tumor cells. Nutr Cancer.
2003;47:76 – 87.

71. Zhou HB, Chen JM, Cai JT, Du Q, Wu CN. Anticancer
activity of genistein on implanted tumor of human
SG7901 cells in nude mice. World J Gastronenterol.
2008;14:627–31.

72. Thangapazham RL, Passi N, Maheshwair RK. Green tea
polyphenol and epigallocatechin gallate induce apopto-
sis and inhibit invasion in human breast cancer cells.
Cancer Biol Ther. 2007;6:1938 – 43.

73. Shukla S, Gupta S. Apigenin-induced prostate cancer
cell death is initiated by reactive oxygen species and
p53 activation. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008;44:1833– 45.
74. Yang SF, Yang WE, Chang HR, Chu SC, Hsieh YS.
Luteolin induces apoptosis in oral squamous cancer
cells. J Dent Res. 2008;87:401– 6.

75. Das A, Banik NL, Ray SK. Garlic compounds generate
reactive oxygen species leading to activation of stress
kinases and cysteine proteases for apoptosis in human
glioblastoma T98G and U87MG cells. Cancer. 2007;
110:1083–94.

76. Xiang N, Zhao R, Zhong W. Sodium selenite induces
apoptosis by generation of superoxide via the mito-
chondrial-dependent pathway in human prostate can-
cer cells. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2009;63:
351– 62.

77. Alkhalaf M, El- Mowafy A, Renno W, Rachid O, Ali A,
Al-Attyiah R. Resveratrol-induced apoptosis in human
breast cancer cells is mediated primarily through the
caspase-3-dependent pathway. Arch Med Res. 2008;39:
162– 8.

78. Zhang Q, Zhao XH, Wang ZJ. Cytotoxicity of ﬂavones
and ﬂavonols to a human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma cell line (KYSE-510) by induction of G(2)/M
arrest and apoptosis. Toxicol In Vitro. 2009;23:797–
807.

79. Krammer PH. CD95’s deadly mission in the immune

system. Nature. 2000;407:789 –95.

80. Hastak K, Agarwal MK, Mukhtar, agarwal ML. Ablation
of either p21 or Bax prevent p53-dependent apoptosis
induced by green tea polypheon epigallocatechin-3-
gallate. FASEB J. 2005;19:789 –91.

81. Huang C, Ma WK, Goranson A, Dong Z. Resveratrol
suppresses cell transformation and induces apoptosis
through a p53-dependent pathway. Carcinogenesis.
1999;20:237– 42.

82. Chen C, Kong AN. Dietary cancer-chemopreventive
compounds: from signaling and gene expression to
pharmacological effects. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2005;
26:318 –26.

83. Nair HK, Rao KV, Aalinkeel R, Mahajan S, Chawda R,
Schwartz SA. Inhibition of prostate cancer cell colony
formation by the ﬂavonoid quercetin correlates with

256

C.D. Davis, N.J. Emenaker, and J.A. Milner

modulation of speciﬁc regulatory genes. Clin Diagn Lab
Immunol. 2004;11:63–9.

84. Yang CS, Chen L, Lee MJ, Balentine D, Kuo MC, Schantz
SP. Blood and urine levels of tea catechins after inges-
tion of different amounts of green tea by human vol-
unteers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 1998;7:
351– 4.

85. Chow HH, Cai Y, Alberts DS, et al. Phase 1 pharmaco-
kinetic study of tea polyphenols following single-dose
administration of epigallocatechin gallate and polyphe-
non E. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2001;10:
53– 8.

86. Nemeth K, Piskula MK. Food content, processing, ab-
sorption and metabolism of onion ﬂavonoids. Crit Rev
Food Sci Nutr. 2007;47:397– 409.

87. Kim YH, Lee DH, Jeong JH, Guo ZS, Lee YJ. Quercetin
augments TRAIL-induced apoptotic death: involvement
of the ERK signal transduction pathway. Biochem Phar-
macol. 2008;75:1946 –58.

88. Mouria M, Gukovskaya AS, Jung Y, et al. Food-derived
polyphenols inhibit pancreatic cancer growth through
mitochondrial cytochrome C release and apoptosis. Int
J Cancer. 2002;98:761–9.

89. Mertens-Talcott SU, Percival SS. Ellagic acid and quer-
cetin interact synergistically with resveratrol in the in-
duction of apoptosis and cause transient cell cycle
arrest in human leukemia cells. Cancer Lett. 2005;218:
141–51.

90. Zu K, Ip C. Synergy between selenium and vitamin E in
apoptosis induction is associated with activation of
distinctive initiator caspases in human prostate cancer
cells. Cancer Res. 2003;63:6988 –95.

91. Davis CD. Nutritional interactions: credentialing of mo-
lecular targets for cancer prevention. Exp Biol Med.
2007;232:176 – 83.

93.

92. Kim HS, Bowen P, Chen L, et al. Effects of tomato sauce
consumption on apoptotic cell death in prostate benign
hyperplasia and carcinoma. Nutr Cancer. 2003;47:
40 –7.
Jarred RA, Keikha M, Dowling C, et al. Induction of
apoptosis in low to moderate-grade human prostate
carcinoma by red clover-derived dietary isoﬂavones
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2002;11:1689 –96.
94. Miller EA, Keku TO, Satia JA, Martin CF, Galanko JA,
Sandler RS. Calcium, vitamin D and apoptosis in the
rectal epithelium. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev.
2005;14:525– 8.

95. Presta M, Dell’Era P, Mitola S, Moroni E, Ronca R,
Rusnati M. Fibroblast growth factor/ﬁbroblast growth
factor
system in angiogenesis. Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev. 2005;16:159 –78.

receptor

96. Albini A, Tosetti F, Benelli R, Noonan DM. Tumor in-
ﬂammatory angiogenesis and chemoprevention. Cancer
Res. 2005;65:10637– 41.

97. Pfeffer U, Ferrari N, Morini M, Benelli R, Noonan DM,
Albini A. Antioangiogenic activity of chemopreventive
drugs. Int J Biol Markers. 2003;18:70 – 4.

98. Cockett MI, Murphy G, Birch ML, et al. Matrix metallo-
proteinases and metastatic cancer. Biochem Soc Symp.
1998;63:295–313.
Ii M, Yamamoto H, Adachi Y, Maruyama Y, Shinomura
Y. Role of matrix metalloproteinase-7 (matrilysin) in

99.

human cancer
angiogenesis. Exp Biol Med. 2006;31:20 –7.

invasion,

apoptosis, growth and

100. Bisacchi D, Benelli R, Vanzetto C, Ferrari N, Tosetti F,
Albini A. Antiangiogenesis and angioprevention: mech-
anisms, problems and perspectives. Cancer Detect
Prev. 2008;27:229 –38.

101. Westermarck J, Kahari VM. Regulation of matrix metal-
lopreoteinase expression in tumor invasion. FASEB J.
1999;13:781–92.

102. Singh RP, Agarwal R. Inducible nitric oxide synthase-
vascular endothelial growth factor axis: a potential tar-
get to inhibit tumor angiogenesis by dietary agents.
Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2007;7:475– 83.

103. Bhat TA, Singh RP. Tumor angiogenesis—a potential
target in cancer chemoprevention Food Chem Toxicol.
2008;46:1334 – 45.

104. Dulak J. Nutraceuticals as anti-angiogenic agents: hopes

and reality. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2005;56:51– 69.

105. Aggarwal BB, Shishodia S, Sandur SK, Pandey MK, Sethi
G. Inﬂammation and cancer: how hot is the link? Bio-
chem Pharmacol. 2006;72:1605–21.

106. Maeda S, Omata M. Inﬂammation and cancer: role of
nuclear factor-kappaB activation. Cancer Sci. 2008;99:
836 – 42.

107. Yu H, Jove R. The STATs of cancer: new molecular
targets come of age. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;4:97–105.
108. Bhutani M, Pathak AK, Nair AS, et al. Capsaicin is a
novel blocker of constitutive and interleukin-6-induc-
ible STAT3 activation. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:3024–32.
109. Lee IO, Lee KH, Pyo JH, Kim JH, Choi YJ, Lee YC.
Anti-inﬂammatory effect of capsaicin in Helicobacter
pylori-infected gastric epithelial cells. Helicobacter.
2007;12:510 –7.

110. Bhardwaj A, Sethi G, Vadhan-Raj S, et al. Resveratrol
inhibits proliferation,
induces apoptosis, and over-
comes chemoresistance through down-regulation of
STAT3 and nuclear factor-kappaB-regulated antiapop-
totic and cell survival gene products in human multiple
myeloma cells. Blood. 2007;109:2293–302.

111. Aggarwal BB, Vijayalekshmi RV, Sung B. Targeting in-
ﬂammatory pathways for prevention and therapy of
cancer: short-term friend, long-term foe. Clin Cancer
Res. 2009;15:425–30.

112. Dhillon N, Aggarwal BB, Newman RA, et al. Phase II
trial of curcumin in patients with advanced pancreatic
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;14:4491–9.
113. Chinnakannu K, Chen D, Li Y, Wang Z, Dou QP, Reddy
GP, Sarkar FH. Cell cycle-dependent effects of 3,3=-
diindolylmethane on proliferation and apoptosis of
prostate cancer cells. J Cell Physiol. 2009;219:94 –9.

114. Yun JM, Afaq F, Khan N, Mukhtar H. Delphinidin, an
anthocyanidin in pigmented fruits and vegetables, in-
duces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in human colon
cancer HCT116 cells. Mol Carcinog. 2009;48:260 –70.
115. Hafeez BB, Siddiqui IA, Asim M, et al. A dietary antho-
cyanidin delphinidin induces apoptosis of human pros-
tate cancer PC3 cells in vitro and in vivo: involvement
of nuclear factor-kappaB signaling. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:8564 –72.

116. Mentor-Marcel RA, Bobe G, Barrett KG, et al. Inﬂamma-
tion-associated serum and colon markers as indicators

Molecular targets for nutritional preemption of cancer

257

117.

of dietary attenuation of colon carcinogenesis in ob/ob
mice. Cancer Prev Res. 2009;2:60 –9.
Jain SK, Rains J, Croad J, Larson B, Jones K. Curcumin
supplementation lowers TNF-alpha,
IL-8, and
MCP-1 secretion in high glucose-treated cultured mono-
cytes and blood levels of TNF-alpha, IL-6, MCP-1, glu-
cose, and glycosylated hemoglobin in diabetic rats. An-
tioxid Redox Signal. 2009;11:241–9.

IL-6,

118. Nonn L, Duong D, Peehl DM. Chemopreventive anti-
inﬂammatory activities of curcumin and other phyto-
chemicals mediated by MAP kinase phosphatase-5 in
prostate cells. Carcinogenesis. 2007;28:1188 –96.

119. Bergman Jungeström M, Thompson LU, Dabrosin C.
Flaxseed and its
inhibit estradiol-induced
growth, angiogenesis, and secretion of vascular endo-
thelial growth factor in human breast cancer xenografts
in vivo. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:1061–7.

lignans

120. Chen T, Rose ME, Hwang H, Nines RG, Stoner GD.
Black raspberries inhibit N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine
(NMBA)-induced angiogenesis in rat esophagus parallel
to the suppression of COX-2 and iNOS. Carcinogenesis.
2006;27:2301–7.

121. Rodrigo KA, Rawal Y, Renner RJ, et al. Suppression of
the tumorigenic phenotype in human oral squamous
cell carcinoma cells by an ethanol extract derived from
freeze-dried black raspberries. Nutr Cancer. 2006;54:
58 – 68.

122. Roy S, Khanna S, Alessio HM, et al. Anti-angiogenic
property of edible berries. Free Radic Res. 2002;36:
1023–31.

123. Min JK, Han KY, Kim EC, et al. Capsaicin inhibits in
vitro and in vivo angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2004;64:
644 –51.

124. Pyun BJ, Choi S, Lee Y, et al. Capsiate, a nonpungent
capsaicin-like compound, inhibits angiogenesis and vas-
cular permeability via a direct inhibition of Src kinase
activity. Cancer Res. 2008;68:227–35.

125. Wallez Y, Cand F, Cruzalegui F, et al. Src kinase phos-
phorylates vascular endothelial-cadherin in response to
vascular endothelial growth factor: identiﬁcation of ty-
rosine 685 as the unique target site. Oncogene. 2007;
26:1067–77.
126. Chang X, Tou JC, Hong C, et al. 3,3=-Diindolylmethane
inhibits angiogenesis and the growth of transplantable
human breast carcinoma in athymic mice. Carcino-
genesis. 2005;26:771– 8.

127. Calder PC. Polyunsaturated fatty acids, inﬂammatory

processes and inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Mol Nutr
Food Res. 2008;52:885–97.

128. Asaumi H, Watanabe S, Taguchi M, et al. Green tea
polyphenol (–)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits etha-
nol-induced activation of pancreatic stellate cells. Eur
J Clin Invest. 2006;36:113–22.
129. Cao Z, Fang J, Xia C, Shi X, Jiang BH. Trans-3,4,5=-
trihydroxystibene inhibits hypoxia-inducible factor 1al-
pha and vascular endothelial growth factor expression
in human ovarian cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;
10:5253– 63.

130. Zhang Q, Tang X, Lu QY, Zhang ZF, Brown J, Le AD.
Resveratrol inhibits hypoxia-induced accumulation of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha and VEGF expression
in human tongue squamous cell carcinoma and hepa-
toma cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005;4:1465–74.

131. Zhang Q, Tang X, Lu Q, Zhang Z, Rao J, Le AD. Green
tea extract and (⫺)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibit hyp-
oxia- and serum-induced HIF-1alpha protein accumula-
tion and VEGF expression in human cervical carcinoma
and hepatoma cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006;5:1227–38.
132. Mukherjee P, Sotnikov AV, Mangian HJ, et al. Energy
intake and prostate tumor growth, angiogeneis, and
vascular endothelial growth factor expression. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 1999;91:512–23.

133. Mukherjee P, Al-Abbadi MM, Kasperzyk JL, Ranes MK,
Seyfried TN. Dietary restriction reduces angiogenesis
and growth in an orthotopic mouse brain tumour
model. Br J Cancer. 2002;86:1615–21.

134. Powolny AA, Wang S, Carlton PS, Hoot DR, Clinton SK.
Interrelationships between dietary restriction,
the
IGF-1 axis, and the expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor by prostate adenocarcinoma in rats. Mol
Carcinog. 2008;47:458 – 65.

135. Lairon D, Defoort C, Martin JC, Amiot-Carlin MJ,
Gastaldi M, Planells R. Nutrigenetics:
links between
genetic background and response to Mediterranean-
type diets. Public Health Nutr. 2009;12:1601– 6.

136. Oyagbemi AA, Azeez OL, Saba AB. Interactions be-
tween reactive oxygen species and cancer: the roles of
natural dietary antioxidants and their molecular mech-
anisms of action. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2009;10:535–44.
137. Seifried HE, Anderson DE, Fisher EI, Milner JA. A review
of the interactions among dietary antioxidants and re-
active oxygen species. J Nutr Biochem. 2007;18:567–79.

NUTRITION AND CANCER, 35(2), 130–136
Copyright © 1999, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

Decreased Growth of Human Prostate LNCaP Tumors in SCID

Mice Fed a Low-Fat, Soy Protein Diet With Isoflavones

William J. Aronson, Christopher N. Tymchuk, Robert M. Elashoff,
William H. McBride, Colin McLean, Hejing Wang, and David Heber

Abstract: Epidemiological studies suggest that high intake
of dietary fat is a risk factor for the development of clinical
prostate cancer. Soy protein has also been proposed to play
a role in the prevention of prostate cancer, and one of the
isoflavones in soy protein, genistein, inhibits the growth of
human prostate cancer cell lines in vitro. This study was de-
signed to evaluate whether altering dietary fat, soy protein,
and isoflavone content affects the growth rate of a human
androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cell line (LNCaP) grown
in severe-combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice. SCID
mice were randomized into four dietary groups: high-fat
(42.0 kcal%) + casein, high-fat (42.0 kcal%) + soy protein +
isoflavone extract, low-fat (12.0 kcal%) + casein, and low-fat
(12.0 kcal%) + soy protein + isoflavone extract. After two
weeks on these diets, the mice were injected subcutaneously
with 1 ´ 105 LNCaP tumor cells and placed in separate cages
(1 mouse/cage) to strictly control caloric intake. Isocaloric di-
ets were given 3 days/wk, and tumor sizes were measured once
per week. The tumor growth rates were slightly reduced in the
group that received the low-fat + soy protein + isoflavone ex-
tract diet compared with the other groups combined (p <
0.05). In addition, the final tumor weights were reduced by
15% in the group that received the low-fat + soy protein +
isoflavone extract diet compared with the other groups com-
bined (p < 0.05). In this xenograft model for prostate cancer,
there were statistically significant effects on tumor growth
rate and final tumor weight attributable to a low-fat + soy
protein + isoflavone extract diet.

Introduction

In the United States, prostate cancer is the most com-
monly diagnosed cancer in men as well as the second lead-
ing cause of male cancer-related deaths (1). It is estimated
that in 1999 there will be 179,300 new prostate cancer cases
and 37,000 men will die from the disease (1). Although la-
tent or clinically insignificant prostate cancer occurs in a

large proportion and at equal rates in autopsy studies among
men of Asian countries and the United States (approx 30%
of men >50 yr old), the incidence of clinically significant
prostate cancer is 15-fold higher in the United States (1–4).
Furthermore, Chinese and Japanese men who immigrate to
this country have an increased incidence and mortality from
prostate cancer compared with Chinese and Japanese men in
their native country (5–8). These epidemiological studies
suggest that environmental factors associated with Western
culture may promote the development of clinical prostate
cancer. Two such dietary factors that have been implicated
are dietary fat and soy protein. A number of epidemiological
studies have shown a positive association between intake of
dietary fat and the incidence and mortality from prostate
cancer (8–12). Furthermore, a recent study by Wang and
co-workers (13) showed that androgen receptor-positive hu-
man prostate cancer cells (LNCaP) had greater tumor
weights and growth rates in nude mice fed a diet high in
polyunsaturated fat (40.5 kcal%) than in mice fed diets
lower in fat content (21.2, 11.6, and 2.3 kcal%) (13).

One of the major differences between Asian and Ameri-
can diets is the consumption of soy-based foodstuffs. Cow-
ard and colleagues (14) reported the average consumption of
soy protein in Taiwan to be 35 g/day per capita (14). The
beneficial effects of soy have been attributed to the iso-
flavones found in highest content in soy, e.g., genistein and
daidzein (15,16). Genistein and daidzein, and their
b-glucoside conjugates, are present in soybeans in concen-
trations of up to 3 mg/g, and the average isoflavone intake in
the Asian culture is estimated to be 39 mg/day (17,18). The
average American eats, at most, a few milligrams of
isoflavones per day (15). The decrease in prostate cancer
mortality in Japanese men compared with those in the
United States may be attributed, in part, to the high soy pro-
tein content in the Japanese diet (16). Whereas a number of
investigators have shown that genistein inhibits the growth
of human prostate cancer cell lines in vitro, no experiments

W. J. Aronson is affiliated with the Department of Urology, C. N. Tymchuk with the Department of Physiological Science, R. M. Elashoff and H. Wang
with the Department of Biostatistics, W. H. McBride and C. McLean with the Department of Radiological Sciences, and D. Heber with the Center for Human
Nutrition, School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095. W. J. Aronson is also affiliated with the West Los Angeles
Veterans Administration Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90073.

have evaluated the effect of soy protein and isoflavones on
the growth of human prostate cancer in vivo. This study was
specifically designed to evaluate whether altering dietary
fat, soy protein, and isoflavone content affects the implanta-
tion rate and growth rate of a human androgen-sensitive
prostate cancer cell line (LNCaP) grown in severe-combined
immunodeficient (SCID) mice.

Methods

Cells and Reagents

The androgen receptor-positive LNCaP cell line was ob-
tained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rock-
ville, MD). The LNCaP cells were grown in RPMI 1640
medium supplemented with L-glutamine, 10% fetal bovine
serum (Omega Scientific, Tarzana, CA), and penicillin-
streptomycin in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and air at 37°C.

Animals

Sixty-six male CB17 beige SCID mice (8 wk old) were ob-
tained from the Department of Laboratory Animal Medicine
Facility at the University of California, Los Angeles, which is
accredited by the American Association for Accreditation of
Laboratory Animal Care. The mice were initially housed five
per cage for two weeks while they received their respective
diets, then, after tumor inoculation, mice were housed one per
cage. The cages were kept in a sterile and pathogen-free envi-
ronment. Cages, bedding, and water were autoclaved before
use. The feeding receptacles were in the top of the cages, so
caloric intake could be monitored and new feedings given
without the cage being opened. Strict sterile technique was

Table 1. Ingredients of Experimental Diets in Gramsa

used whenever the cages, mice, and feed were handled. Ap-
proval for the experiments was obtained from the University
of California, Los Angeles, Chancellor’s Animal Research
Committee, and all animals were cared for in accordance with
the Institutional Guidelines.

Diets

The ingredients of the four experimental diets (prepared
by Dyets, Bethlehem, PA) are listed in Table 1. Corn oil was
used as the source of fat, and the fat calories from corn oil
were balanced with carbohydrate calories from cornstarch.
The protein source was soy protein isolate (Supro 670 HG,
donated by Protein Technologies International, St. Louis,
MO) or casein. The soy protein isolate (Supro 670 HG) con-
tains the following isoflavones: 0.078% conjugated geni-
stein, 0.107% unconjugated genistein, 0.037% conjugated
daidzein, 0.052% unconjugated daidzein, 0.006% conju-
gated glycitein, and 0.009% unconjugated glycitein by
weight. The soy isoflavone extract (PTI-G2535, donated by
Protein Technologies International, St. Louis, MO) contains
the following unconjugated isoflavones: 43.7% genistein,
21.8% daidzein, and 3.4% glycitein by weight. The total of
isoflavones in each soy protein-containing diet was 0.18%
by weight. The diets were radiated to obtain sterility. During
the experiments, the diets were stored at 5°C.

Feeding Protocol

After tumor injection, mice were housed one mouse per
cage to allow us to give the mice specific quantities of food
and to accurately measure the caloric intake of the mice dur-
ing the experiment. Three times a week the mice were given

Ingredient

Corn oil
Casein
Soy protein
Isoflavone extract
Cornstarch
Sucrose
Dyetroseb
Cellulose
AIN-93G-MX mineral mixc
AIN-93M-MX mineral mixc
AIN-93-VX vitamin mixc
L-Cysteine
L-Methionine
Choline bitartrate
Total grams

Low-fat +

casein

Low-fat + soy

protein + isoflavones

High-fat +

casein

High-fat + soy

protein + isoflavones

Diet

50
200

398
117
132
50
35

10
3
1.6
2.5
999.1

50

200

1.81

395
118
132
50

35
10
2.5
2.5
2.5
999.31

175
200

163
117
58
50
35

10
3
1.6
2.5
815.1

175

200

1.38

161
118
58
50

35
10
2.5
2.5
2.5
815.88

a: Four experimental diets were formulated containing varying amounts of corn oil as a source of fat and soy protein or casein as the source of protein.

Isoflavones are primarily from isoflavone extract and, to a lesser extent, from soy protein.

b: Depolymerized cornstarch used to pelletize diets.
c: See Reference 19.

Vol. 35, No. 2

131

fresh food. Each time the mice received fresh food, the calo-
ric intake from the prior feeding period was determined.
This was done by subtracting the amount of feed remaining
in the feeding receptacle from the amount available to each
mouse at the beginning of each feeding period. The average
caloric intake (from the prior feeding period) of all the mice
was calculated, and this amount was given to each mouse for
the subsequent feeding period. With this protocol, caloric in-
take was reduced for the mice with the highest intakes, while
mice with lower caloric intakes were given the opportunity
to increase their caloric consumption. This technique pro-
vided approximately equal caloric intake for all four groups
of mice (see Results).

Design of Experiments

LNCaP cells were harvested from subconfluent cultures
after incubation for one minute with 0.25% trypsin and
0.02% EDTA. After suspension in RPMI 1640 medium sup-
plemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, the live cells were
stained with trypan blue dye and counted manually with a
microscope and hemocytometer. The LNCaP cells were re-
suspended in ice-cold Matrigel (Collaborative Biomedical
Products, Bedford, MA) at a final concentration of 1 ´ 105
cells/0.2 ml Matrigel. Each mouse was given a subcutaneous
inoculation of 1 ´ 105 tumor cells in the lateral abdomen
with a disposable syringe and a 26-gauge needle. An initial
experiment with 20 animals (5 in each dietary group) was
performed by injecting 1 ´ 106 tumor cells in 0.2 ml of
Matrigel per animal. When the tumors in these animals
reached 1.0–1.5 cm3, they caused the animals in all four di-
etary groups to become cachectic. This occurred in all ani-
mals at approximately seven weeks after tumor inoculation.
Therefore, 1 ´ 105 cells in 0.2 ml of Matrigel were used for
subsequent experiments to allow tumor growth over a longer
time period to evaluate the effect of the diets.

Two successive experiments were performed: the first
with five animals in each of the four dietary groups and the
second with six or seven animals in each of the four dietary
groups. The experiments were run separately because of
limited space and resources in our SCID mouse facility to
accommodate our one mouse per cage experimental design.
The data from both experiments were used for the statistical
analysis. All animals were randomly assigned to one of the
four dietary groups (high-fat + casein, high-fat + soy protein
+ isoflavones, low-fat + casein, or low-fat + soy protein +
isoflavones) and maintained on this diet for two weeks be-
fore tumor cell injection. All animals were kept on an
isocaloric diet, as described in Feeding Protocol. Once the
tumors became palpable, the dimensions were recorded
weekly through Week 12 of the experiment. Animal weights
were also recorded weekly. The tumor volumes were calcu-
lated using the following formula: length ´ width ´ height ´
0.5236 (20). Thirteen weeks after the initiation of the experi-
ment, all mice were sacrificed. Blood was collected and cen-
trifuged, and the serum was frozen at -70°C. The tumors
were dissected, weighed, and frozen in liquid nitrogen.

Determination of Serum Prostate-Specific Antigen and
Testosterone

Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels were deter-
mined using an enzyme immunoassay kit (American Qualex
Antibodies, San Clemente, CA). Total serum testosterone
was determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
(KMI Diagnostics, Minneapolis, MN). All the above assays
were performed in duplicate. The interassay variability was
<5.0%.

Statistical Analysis

A linear regression model was used to test the differences
of body weight, caloric intake, final tumor weight, PSA lev-
els, and testosterone levels among the four diet groups. Be-
cause this study consisted of two successive experiments,
“experiment” was also considered a covariate and, together
with baseline body weight and average weekly caloric in-
take, was included in the linear regression model. Baseline
body weight and average weekly caloric intake did not show
any significant association with tumor weight and PSA and
testosterone levels. Therefore, “experiment” was the only
covariate included in the final model. Growth rate was as-
sessed by repeatedly measuring tumor volumes over time. A
random coefficient model was developed to correlate tumor
volume, time (week), diet, and other covariates (experiment
and baseline body weight). Covariates that did not show sig-
nificant association with tumor volume were excluded from
the model. Log-rank test was used to test the time to palpa-
ble tumor among the four diet groups. The above analyses
were also carried out comparing each individual dietary
group with the other three dietary groups combined.

Results

Forty-three (94%) of the 46 mice developed measurable
tumors: 10 (10/12) in the high-fat + casein group, 11 (11/11)
in the high-fat + soy protein + isoflavone group, 12 (12/12)
in the low-fat + casein group, and 10 (10/11) in the low-fat +
soy protein + isoflavone group. There was no significant dif-
ference in caloric intake among the animals in the four
groups (Figure 1). In addition, there was no significant dif-
ference in the body weights among the groups (Figure 2).
When the final tumor weight and tumor growth rate were
compared among the four dietary groups, there were no sig-
nificant differences. However, the final tumor weights in
mice fed the low-fat + soy protein + isoflavone diet were
15% less than the final tumor weights of the animals in the
other three groups combined (high-fat + casein, high-fat +
soy protein + isoflavone, and low-fat + casein) ( p = 0.0499,
general linear model) (Table 2). In addition, the growth rate
of the tumors in the mice fed the low-fat diet combined with
soy protein and isoflavones was lower than that in the other
three groups combined (Figure 3) ( p = 0.0382, mixed
model). There was no difference among the four groups in

132

Nutrition and Cancer 1999

Figure 1. Caloric intake per week. Mice were housed 1/cage to allow for strict control and monitoring of caloric intake. There was no significant difference in
caloric intake among groups. Filled circles, high-fat + casein; filled squares, high-fat + soy protein + isoflavones; open circles, low-fat + casein; open squares,
low-fat + soy protein + isoflavones.

Figure 2. Mouse weights (minus tumor weights) per week. There was no significant difference in mouse weights among groups. Symbols as in Figure 1.

Vol. 35, No. 2

133

Figure 3. LNCaP tumor growth per week. Mice fed low-fat + soy protein + isoflavone diet had significantly slower-growing tumors than other dietary groups
combined (p = 0.0382). Symbols as in Figure 1.

Table 2. Final LNCaP Tumor Weights and Time From
Tumor Injection to Palpable Tumora,b

Dietary Group

High-fat + casein
High-fat + soy protein + isoflavones
Low-fat + casein
Low-fat + soy protein + isoflavones

Tumor

Weight, g

Time to
Palpable

Tumor, wk

0.86 ± 0.21
0.89 ± 0.19
0.81 ± 0.18
0.72 ± 0.16*

8.30 ± 0.30
8.33 ± 0.24
7.90 ± 0.18
8.25 ± 0.16

n

9
11
12
10

a: Values are means ± SE; n, number of mice.
b: Statistical significance is as follows: *, significantly less than other

groups (p = 0.0499).

time to developing palpable tumors (Table 2). The testoster-
one levels at 13 weeks were 70% lower in mice fed the
low-fat + soy protein + isoflavone diet than in the other
groups, but this was not statistically significant (Table 3).
There was no difference in PSA levels between the four
groups at the termination of the experiment (Table 3).

Discussion

In this study, we evaluated the effect of dietary fat, soy
protein, and soy isoflavones on the growth of human pros-
tate cancer cells in a xenograft SCID mouse model. We
found that combining a low-fat diet (12 kcal%) with soy pro-
tein (20 kcal%) and isoflavones (0.18% by weight) reduced
the tumor growth rate and the final tumor weights compared
with the other diets in our study.

In a prior study, Wang and co-workers (13) showed a sig-
nificant reduction in the growth of LNCaP tumors in nude
mice fed diets lower in fat (21.2, 11.6, and 2.3 kcal%) com-
pared with mice fed a high-fat diet (40.5 kcal%). In our
study, there was a trend toward decreased tumor weights in
the low-fat + casein group compared with the high-fat + ca-
sein group, although this did not reach statistical signifi-
cance. It may be that, with a larger sample size, this
difference between the low-fat and high-fat groups may
have reached statistical significance. An alternative explana-
tion for the differences in the results of our study and those
of Wang and co-workers may be explained by differences in
the experimental designs. In our study, the one animal per
cage design allowed for an isocaloric feeding protocol. In
the study by Wang and co-workers, there were multiple ani-
mals per cage, and therefore caloric intake was not strictly
controlled or monitored. It is possible that the marked differ-

Table 3. Serum PSA and Testosterone Levelsa

Dietary Group

Testosterone,

PSA, ng/ml

ng/ml

High-fat + casein
High-fat + soy protein + isoflavones
Low-fat + casein
Low-fat + soy protein + isoflavones

44.3 ± 12.8
48.0 ± 9.5
48.6 ± 10.9
51.8 ± 11.8

1.49 ± 1.26
1.09 ± 0.5
1.8 ± 0.98
0.42 ± 0.03

a: Values are means ± SE. Tests were performed at completion of experi-
ment. PSA, prostate-specific antigen. There were no significant differ-
ences among groups.

134

Nutrition and Cancer 1999

ence between the low-fat and high-fat groups observed by
Wang and co-workers may be due to a difference in caloric
intake, since higher energy intake may lead to increased tu-
mor growth (21). An alternative explanation may relate to
the animal model that we used. Whereas nude mice (used by
Wang and co-workers) possess B cell immunity, SCID mice
lack T cell, B cell, and natural killer cell immunity. It may be
that nutrition is interacting with the immune system in the
nude mouse to cause more dramatic differences in tumor
size.

The role of soy protein and isoflavones in the prevention
and treatment of prostate cancer remains largely undefined
and is actively being studied at a number of centers. Re-
search has focused on the isoflavone genistein and its effects
on prostate cancer cell lines. Genistein has been shown to in-
hibit the growth of human prostate cancer cell lines in tissue
culture and in histoculture (22,23). In addition, genistein
also inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis of prostate
cancer cell lines (24). Soy protein also contains noniso-
flavone substances with anticancer properties (Bowman-
Burke inhibitor), which may also be responsible for the
growth-inhibitory effect seen in the present study (25).

In this study, altering the fat, soy, and isoflavone content
had no effect on the PSA levels. PSA is a well-known
marker for prostate cancer progression that correlates with
tumor growth and metastases (26). Because the low-fat diet
high in soy protein and isoflavone caused only a 15% reduc-
tion in the final tumor weight in this experiment, this effect
may not be large enough to cause a significant change in the
serum PSA level. Alternatively, the diet may have inhibited
the growth of a population of the tumor cells that do not pro-
duce PSA. In the present study, the mice fed the low-fat diet
high in soy protein and isoflavones had a 70% decrease in
total testosterone levels, although this did not reach statisti-
cal significance. Wang and co-workers (13) also found that
low-fat diets failed to reduce serum testosterone levels. Al-
though several studies found a correlation between low-fat
diets and circulating androgen levels, further investigation is
required in this area (27,28). Low-fat diets may cause a re-
duction in bioavailable testosterone (free testosterone) levels
by increasing sex hormone-binding globulin levels, although
further investigations are needed in this area as well (29).
In conclusion, in this xenograft model for prostate cancer,
there were statistically significant effects on tumor growth
rate and final tumor weight attributable to a low-fat diet
combined with soy protein and isoflavones.

Acknowledgments and Notes

The authors thank Dr. Bill Go and Don Yowell for advice and sugges-
tions during the course of the experiment. This study was supported in part
by The Green Family Foundation, by National Cancer Institute Grants
CA-42710-11 and CA-42710-12, and by the Department of Veterans Af-
fairs. All work was completed at the University of California, Los Angeles
(Los Angeles, CA) and at the West Los Angeles Veterans Administration
Medical Center (Los Angeles, CA). Address reprint requests to Dr. Wil-
liam J. Aronson, UCLA Dept. of Urology, Box 951738, Los Angeles, CA

90095-1738. Phone: (310) 268-3446. FAX: (310) 268-4858. E-mail:
waronson@ucla.edu.

Submitted 16 March 1999; accepted in final form 15 July 1999.

References

1. Landis, SH, Taylor, M, Bolden, S, and Wingo, PA: Cancer statistics,

1999. CA Cancer J Clin 49, 8–31, 1999.

2. Parkin, DM, Pisani, P, and Ferlay, J: Global cancer statistics. CA Can-

cer J Clin 49, 33–64, 1999.

3. Muir, CS, Nectoux, J, and Staszewski, J: The epidemiology of prostate
cancer. Geographical distribution and time-trends. Acta Oncol 30,
133–140, 1991.

4. Yatani, R, Kusano, I, Shiraishi, T, Hayashi, T, and Stemmerman, GN:
Latent prostatic carcinoma: pathological and epidemiological aspects.
Jpn J Clin Oncol 19, 319–326, 1989.

5. Shimizu, H, Ross, RK, Bernstein, L, Yatani, R, Henderson, BE, et al.:
Cancers of the prostate and breast among Japanese and white immi-
grants in Los Angeles County. Br J Cancer 63, 963–966, 1991.

6. Stellman, SD, and Wang, QS: Cancer mortality in Chinese migrants to
New York City. Comparison with Chinese in Tianjin and with United
States-born whites. Cancer 73, 1270–1275, 1994.

7. Cook, LS, Goldoft, M, Schwartz, SM, and Weiss, NS: Incidence of
adenocarcinoma of the prostate in Asian immigrants to the United
States and their descendants. J Urol 161, 152–155, 1999.

8. Whittemore, AS, Kolonel, LN, Wu, AH, John, EM, Gallagher, RP, et
al.: Prostate cancer in relation to diet, physical activity, and body size
in blacks, whites, and Asians in the United States and Canada. JNCI
87, 652–661, 1995.

9. Ross, RK, Shimizu, H, Paganini-Hill, A, Honda, G, and Henderson,
BE: Case-control studies of prostate cancer in blacks and whites in
southern California. JNCI 78, 869–874, 1987.

10. Kolonel, LN, Yoshizawa, CN, and Hankin, JN: Diet and prostatic can-
cer: a case-control study in Hawaii. Am J Epidemiol 127, 999–1012,
1988.

11. West, DW, Slattery, ML, Robison, LM, French, TK, and Mahoney,
AW: Adult dietary intake and prostate cancer risk in Utah: a
case-control study with special emphasis on aggressive tumors. Cancer
Causes Control 2, 85–94, 1991.

12. Giovannucci, E, Rimm, EB, Colditz, GA, Stampfer, MJ, Ascherio, A,
et al.: A prospective study of dietary fat and risk of prostate cancer.
JNCI 85, 1571–1579, 1993.

13. Wang, Y, Corr, JG, Thaler, HT, Tao, Y, Fair, WR, et al.: Decreased
growth of established human prostate LNCaP tumors in nude mice fed
a low-fat diet. JNCI 87, 1456–1462, 1995.

14. Coward, L, Barnes, NC, Setchell, KDR, and Barnes, S: Genistein,
daidzein and their b-glycoside conjugates: antitumor isoflavones in
soybean foods from American and Asian diets. J Agric Food Chem 41,
1961–1967, 1993.

15. Messina, MJ, Persky, V, Setchell, KD, and Barnes, S: Soy intake and
cancer risk: a review of the in vitro and in vivo data. Nutr Cancer 21,
113–131, 1994.

16. Messina, M, and Barnes, S: The role of soy products in reducing risk of

cancer. JNCI 83, 541–546, 1991.

17. Zheng, W, Dai, Q, Custer, LJ, Shu, XO, Wen, WQ, et al.: Urinary ex-
cretion of isoflavonoids and the risk of breast cancer. Cancer Epi-
demiol Biomarkers Prev 8, 35–40, 1999.

18. Kimira, M, Arai, Y, Shimoi, K, and Watanabe, S: Japanese intake of
flavonoids and isoflavonoids from foods. J Epidemiol 8, 168–175, 1998.
19. Reeves, PG, Nielsen, FH, and Fahey, GC, Jr: AIN-93 purified diets for
laboratory rodents: final report of the American Institute of Nutrition
Ad Hoc Writing Committee on the reformulation of the AIN-76A ro-
dent diet. J Nutr 123, 1939–1951, 1993.

Vol. 35, No. 2

135

20. Gleave, ME, Hsieh, JT, Gao, C, von Eschenbach, AC, and Chung, LW:
Acceleration of human prostate cancer growth in vivo by factors pro-
duced by prostate and bone fibroblast. Cancer Res 51, 3753–3761, 1991.
21. Mukherjee, P, Sotnikov, AV, Mangian, HJ, Zhou, J, Visek, WJ, et al.:
Energy intake and prostate tumor growth, angiogenesis, and vascular
endothelial growth factor expression. JNCI 91, 489–491, 1999.

22. Peterson, G, and Barnes, S: Genistein and biochanin A inhibit the
growth of human prostate cancer cells but not epidermal growth factor
receptor autophosphorylation. Prostate 22, 335–345, 1993.

23. Geller, J, Sionit, L, Partido, C, Li, L, Tan, X, et al.: Genistein inhibits
the growth of human-patient BPH and prostate cancer in histoculture.
Prostate 34, 75–79, 1998.

24. Kyle, E, Neckers, L, Takimoto, C, Curt, G, and Bergan, R: Geni-
stein-induced apoptosis of prostate cancer cells is preceded by a spe-
cific decrease in focal adhesion kinase activity. Mol Pharmacol 51,
193–200, 1997.

25. Kennedy, AR: The evidence for soybean products as cancer preventive

agents. J Nutr 125, 733S–743S, 1995.

26. Stamey, TA, Yang, N, Hay, AR, McNeal, JE, Freiha, FS, et al.: Pros-
tate-specific antigen as a serum marker for adenocarcinoma of the
prostate. N Engl J Med 317, 909–916, 1987.

27. Hamalainen, EK, Adlercreutz, H, Pusak, P, and Pietinen, P: Diet and
serum sex hormones in healthy men. J Steroid Biochem 20, 459–464,
1984.

28. Hill, P, Wynder, EL, Garbaczewski, L, Garnes, H, and Walker, AR:
Diet and urinary steroids in black and white North American men and
black South African men. Cancer Res 39, 5101–5105, 1979.

29. Tymchuk, CN, Tessler, SB, Aronson, WJ, and Barnard, RJ: Effects of
diet and exercise on insulin, sex hormone-binding globulin, and pros-
tate-specific antigen. Nutr Cancer 31, 127–131, 1998.

136

Nutrition and Cancer 1999

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1994 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1994 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1994 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1994 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1994 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1994 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1994 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. Nutrient Ineractions and Toxicity

Implanted Tumor Growth Is Suppressed and Survival Is Prolonged in
Sixty Percent of Food-Restricted Mice

Junko Matsuzaki, Ryoich Yamaji, Kenichi Kiyomiya,* Masaru Kurebe,* Hiroshi Inui1
and Yoshihisa Nakano
Departments of Applied Biological Chemistry and *Veterinary Science, Osaka Prefecture University,
Sakai, Osaka 599-8531, Japan

ABSTRACT To examine the effect of food restriction on immune functions in the tumor-bearing state, mice were
divided into a control group (fed 5.0 g diet/d; 71 kJ/d) and a 60% food-restricted group (fed 3.0 g diet/d; 43 kJ/d)
at 8-wk of age, and 4 wk later, L1210 tumor cells were inoculated intradermally. In the food-restricted mice, tumor
growth was signiﬁcantly suppressed, and mean survival time after the tumor inoculation was prolonged (P ⬍ 0.05).
The plasma concentrations of two antitumor cytokines, interferon-␥ (IFN-␥) and tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF-␣),
were greater in the food-restricted group before tumor inoculation (P ⬍ 0.05). Furthermore, the food-restricted mice
had signiﬁcantly higher plasma levels of IFN-␥ and TNF-␣ after tumor inoculation, although the treatment
signiﬁcantly increased these cytokine levels in both groups. Splenic natural killer cell cytotoxicity was also higher
in the tumor-bearing food-restricted mice than in controls (P ⬍ 0.05). Food-restricted mice have strong antitumor
immunity, and as a result, tumor growth is suppressed and survival time is prolonged in these mice. J. Nutr. 130:
111–115, 2000.

KEY WORDS:
● natural killer cells

●

food restriction ● mice ● antitumor immunity ●

interferon-␥ ●

tumor necrosis factor-␣

Food restriction (FR)2 prolongs the mean and maximal life
spans of rats, mice and other species (Cheney et al. 1980,
Comfort 1963, Ross 1961, Weindruch and Walford 1988). In
addition, FR of rodents results in a reduced incidence and
delayed onset of tumors and other age-associated diseases
(Weindruch 1989, Yu et al. 1982).

FR results in the activation of cellular immunity, altered
subsets of T cells (Gartner et al. 1992), enhanced responses of
T cells to mitogens and interleukin-2 (Hishinuma et al. 1990),
and altered production of antibodies and interleukin-2 (Spear-
Hartley and Sherman 1994). It has been proposed that host
immune surveillance mechanisms effectively suppress the in-
cidence of tumors in FR animals (Konno et al. 1991). FR also
has been shown to greatly reduce white blood cell (WBC)
number, particularly the lymphocyte count (Kubo et al. 1984).
Although mechanisms by which FR reduces WBC number
have not yet been clariﬁed, it has been reported that the
incidence of leukemia is lowered in FR mice due to the
reduction of leukocytes (Volk et al. 1994). Moreover, strong
immune responses and a high resistance to developing spon-
taneous tumors in FR mice are thought to be closely related to
the reduction of lymphocyte number (Weindruch and Walford
1988).

Effects of FR on immune functions in tumor-bearing ani-
mals have not yet been well elucidated so we inoculated L1210

1 To whom correspondence should be addressed.
2 Abbreviations used: FR, food restriction or food-restricted; IFN-␥, interfer-
on-␥; NK, natural killer; TNF-␣, tumor necrosis factor-␣; WBC, white blood cell.

tumor cells intradermally into 60% FR mice, and studied host
immune functions after the tumor inoculation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals. Male BDF1 mice (5-wk-old) were obtained from Clea
(Osaka, Japan). These mice had free access to water and to a diet
reported by Konno et al. (1991), which was composed of 20% casein,
64% potato starch, 5% soybean oil, 5% cellulose powder, 4% salt
mixture and 2% vitamin mixture.3 These mice were kept at con-
trolled temperature (23 ⫾ 2°C), humidity (60 ⫾ 10%) and lighting
(12-h light and 12-h dark cycle), and housed individually. When
8-wk-old, mice were randomly divided into control and 60% FR
groups. Mice in the control group were fed 5.0 g of the diet daily (71
kJ/d), whereas 60% FR mice received 3.0 g (43 kJ/d). All experimen-
tal procedures involving laboratory animals were approved by the
Animal Care and Use Committee of Osaka Prefecture University.

Inoculation of tumor cells. L1210 leukemia cells (America Type
Culture Collection, CCL219), obtained from Riken Cell Bank
(Tsukuba, Japan), were maintained in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s
medium, supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum and
10 mmol/L HEPES. At 12 wk of age (4 wk after the initiation of FR),

3 Vitamin mixture contains 46,000 IU vitamin A acetate, 23,300 IU cholecal-
ciferol, 1,200 mg vitamin E acetate, 6 mg vitamin K3, 59 mg thiamin HCl salt, 59
mg riboﬂavin, 29 mg vitamin B6 HCl salt, 0.2 mg vitamin B12, 588 mg vitamin C,
1 mg D-biotin, 2 mg folic acid, 235 mg pantothenic acid Ca salt, 294 mg nicotinic
acid, and 1,176 mg inositol in 100 g with a balance with lactose. Mineral mixture
contains 0.43 g CaHPO4 䡠 2H2O, 34.31 g KH2PO4, 25.06 g NaCl, 0.623 g
Fe-citrate (Fe 17%), 4.8764 g MgSO4, 0.02 g ZnCl2, 0.121 g MnSO4 䡠 4 –5H2O,
0.156 g CuSO4 䡠 5H2O, 0.0005 g KI, 29.29 g CaCO3, and 0.0025 g (NH4)6Mo7O24
䡠 4H2O in 100 g with a balance with cellulose powder.

0022-3166/00 $3.00 © 2000 American Society for Nutritional Sciences.
Manuscript received 14 June 1999. Initial review completed 7 July 1999. Revision accepted 30 September 1999.

111

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/130/1/111/4686074
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

112

MATSUZAKI ET AL.

TNF-␣ data, values were logarithmically transformed to improve
normality and to compensate for unequal variance, and were analyzed
by two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test. All data are shown as
means ⫾ SD, and statistical signiﬁcance is deﬁned as P ⬍ 0.05.

RESULTS

When FR was started in BDF1 mice at 8 wk of age, body
weight was signiﬁcantly lowered within 1 wk and at 12 wk of
age, the weight in the FR group was about 75% (P ⬍ 0.05) of
that in the control (Fig. 1). The FR-induced body weight
change observed in this experiment is consistent with previous
reports (Hishinuma et al. 1988, Konno et al. 1991). Tumors
appeared at the site of the inoculation in both the FR and
control groups by 2 wk after the treatment (at 12 wk), and the
tumors progressively grew thereafter. However, the rate of the
tumor growth was signiﬁcantly slower in the FR group, and 3.5
wk (25 d) after the inoculation, tumor weight in the FR mice
was ⬍ 30% (P ⬍ 0.05) of that in controls (Fig. 2A). A
signiﬁcant difference was also seen in survival curves between
the FR and control groups (Fig. 2B). Mean survival time after
tumor inoculation in the control group was 30.7 d, and all
control mice died by 35 d. In contrast, in the FR group, the
mean survival time was prolonged to 38.5 d (P ⬍ 0.05), and
the ﬁnal mouse survived until 54 d.

Although red blood cell number was not different between

FIGURE 1 Experimental design and body weight change of con-
trol and 60% food-restricted (FR) mice. Male mice at 8 wk of age were
divided into control (5 g of a diet/d; 71 kJ/d) and 60% FR (3 g of a diet/d;
43 kJ/d) groups, and 4 wk later these mice were inoculated with L1210
tumor cells by intradermal injection. Values are means ⫾ SD, n ⫽ 7. *: P
⬍ 0.05 compared with the control mice at the corresponding time point.
#: P ⬍ 0.05 compared with 8-wk-old mice in each group.

mice in both the FR and control groups were inoculated with L1210
by intradermal injection of ⬃10 6 cells. For determination of tumor
growth, 2, 3 and 3.5 wk after the inoculation these mice (seven mice
in each group at each time point) were anesthetized with ethyl ether,
and tumors in these mice were isolated and weighed.

Determination of leukocyte, lymphocyte, neutrophil and mono-
cyte counts. Mice (ﬁve mice in each group) were anesthetized with
ethyl ether, and blood was collected by cardiac puncture. Blood
samples (10% in an EDTA solution) were incubated on ice until
measured with an automatic blood corpuscle count apparatus (Sys-
mex K-1000; Toua Iyou Electric, Kobe, Japan). For investigation of
differential counts, blood smears were prepared on microscope slides,
and the slides were air-dried and stained by a modiﬁed Giemsa
method (Seki et al. 1981). Leukocytes (over 200 cells) on the slides
were examined and the percentages of lymphocytes, neutrophils and
monocytes were determined.

Determination of plasma cytokine levels. Blood was collected by
cardiac puncture, and plasma interferon-␥ (IFN-␥) and tumor necro-
sis factor-␣ (TNF-␣) levels were determined by enzyme-linked im-
munosorbent assay methods using commercial kits (QuantikineTM M
Mouse IFN-␥ Immunoassay and QuantikineTM M Mouse TNF-␣
Immunoassay; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN).

Cytotoxicity assay for natural killer (NK) cells. Spleen cells
were prepared according to a published method (Weindruch et al.
1983). NK-sensitive YAC-1 cells were used as target cells for the
assay of NK cell cytotoxicity. Spleen and target cells were co-cultured
in a 96-well microtiter plate at the effector to target ratio of 100:1 for
4 h at 37°C in 5% CO2, and NK cell cytotoxicity was measured by a
lactate dehydrogenase-release method using a commercial kit (Cyto-
Tox 96® Non-Radioactive Cytotoxicity Assay; Promega, Madison,
WI) according to manufacturer’s instructions.

Statistical analysis. Statistical analyses were performed with
GB-Stat 5.4 (Dynamic Microsystems, Sliver Spring, MD). Body
weights were compared between the FR and control groups during the
experiment by two-way ANOVA for repeated measures, and post-hoc
analyses were done by Tukey’s method. Mean survival time after the
tumor inoculation, and lymphocyte, neutrophil and monocyte counts
were compared between the two groups by one-way ANOVA fol-
lowed by Scheffe´ post-hoc test. Effects of FR on tumor growth, WBC
number and NK cell activity were evaluated by two-way ANOVA,
and multiple comparisons were done by Tukey’s test. For IFN-␥ and

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/130/1/111/4686074
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

FIGURE 2 Effects of 60% food restriction (FR) of mice on the
growth of implanted tumors (A) and tumor-related survival curves (B).
Panel A. Values are means ⫾ SD, n ⫽ 9. *: P ⬍ 0.05 compared with the
control mice at the corresponding time point. Panel B. Tumor-related
mortality was observed in the FR and control groups after the inocu-
lation of L1210 cells (n ⫽ 10). The mean survival time of the FR group
(38.5 d) is signiﬁcantly (P ⬍ 0.05) different from that of the control group
(30.7 d).

ANTI-TUMOR IMMUNITY IN FOOD-RESTRICTED MICE

113

FIGURE 3 White blood cell (WBC) number before and after tumor
inoculation in control and 60% food-restricted (FR) mice. Values are
means ⫾ SD, n ⫽ 9. *: P ⬍ 0.05 compared with the control mice at the
corresponding time point.

the control and FR groups (data not shown), WBC number
was 45% lower (P ⬍ 0.05) in the FR mice (Fig. 3), as reported
previously (Kubo et al. 1984). Tumor cell inoculation did not
affect WBC number in either group and the number was
signiﬁcantly lower in the FR mice even 3.5 wk after inocula-
tion. Lymphocytes and neutrophils were reduced in the FR
group, compared to the controls, in the tumor-bearing state
(P ⬍ 0.05) (Table 1).

Before tumor inoculation, plasma IFN-␥ concentration in
the FR mice was higher than that in the control (P ⬍ 0.05).
When L1210 tumor cells were implanted, a signiﬁcant eleva-
tion in the plasma IFN-␥level occurred which peaked at 3 wk
in both groups (Fig. 4A). However, the FR mice had a higher
plasma IFN-␥concentration even after the tumor inoculation,
and at the peak, the level in the FR mice was about 3.5-fold
greater than that in the controls (P ⬍ 0.05). The plasma
TNF-␣ concentration also was signiﬁcantly augmented by FR
in the nontumor-bearing mice (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, 3.5 wk
after tumor inoculation, plasma TNF-␣ concentration in the
FR mice was also higher (about 2.5-fold greater) than that in
the control (P ⬍ 0.05), although the tumor inoculation sig-
niﬁcantly increased the TNF-␣ level even in the control
group.

TABLE 1

Lymphocyte, neutrophil and monocyte counts in 60% food-
restricted (FR) mice and controls with implanted tumors1,2

Lymphocytes

Neutrophils

Monocytes

⫻ 10⫺8 cells/L

Control mice
FR mice

19.2 ⫾ 8.76
5.5 ⫾ 2.51*

22.7 ⫾ 6.73
11.4 ⫾ 3.81*

1.78 ⫾ 0.642
1.48 ⫾ 0.676

1 FR and control mice at 12-wk-old were inoculated with L1210
tumor cells, and 3.5 wk later lymphocyte, neutrophil and monocyte
counts were determined.

2 Values are means ⫾ SD, n ⫽ 5. *: P ⬍ 0.05 compared with the

control mice.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/130/1/111/4686074
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

FIGURE 4 Changes in plasma interferon-␥ (IFN-␥) (A) and tumor
necrosis factor-␣ (TNF-␣) (B) levels after tumor inoculation in food-
restricted (FR) mice. FR and control mice at 12-wk-old were inoculated
with L1210 tumor cells, and changes in plasma IFN-␥and TNF-␣levels
were examined. Values are means ⫾ SD, n ⫽ 5. *: P ⬍ 0.05 compared
with the control mice at the corresponding time point. #: P ⬍ 0.05
compared with wk 0.

Before inoculation, there was no signiﬁcant difference be-
tween the FR and control groups in NK cell cytotoxicity (Fig.
5). However, tumor inoculation signiﬁcantly augmented NK
cell cytotoxicity in the FR mice, but not in the control mice.
Thus, at 3.5 wk after inoculation, NK cell cytotoxicity was
greater in FR mice than in control mice (P ⬍ 0.05).

DISCUSSION

It has been shown that FR prevents the occurrence of
late-life spontaneous tumor development and reduces the in-
cidence of tumors induced by radiation or chemical carcino-
gens (Higami et al. 1995, Kolaja et al. 1996, Yoshida et al.
1997). In addition, it has been proposed that these effects of
FR on the onset of tumors are due to the activation of host
immune surveillance mechanisms (Konno et al. 1991, Wein-
druch et al. 1986). Our present data obtained in mice inocu-
lated with L1210 tumor cells show that the growth of the
implanted tumor is signiﬁcantly suppressed in 60% FR mice,
and survival time is longer in these mice (Fig. 2).

In the tumor-bearing state, it has been shown that tumor-
primed CD4⫹ T cells are activated to produce IFN-␥
(Yamamoto et al. 1995). IFN-␥ possesses an antiproliferative
activity against many transformed cell lines in addition to its
antiviral and immunoregulatory functions (Abe et al. 1998,
Giovarelli et al. 1986, Stark et al. 1998). TNF-␣, which was

114

MATSUZAKI ET AL.

particularly lymphocytes (Kubo et al. 1984, Weindruch and
Walford 1988). In our study, tumor inoculation did not sig-
niﬁcantly change total WBC number in either the 60% FR or
control groups, and lymphocyte number in the FR mice was
signiﬁcantly lower even in the tumor-bearing state. It has been
shown that FR induces apoptosis, and immune organs, such as
spleen and thymus, are comparatively more sensitive to apop-
tosis than other organs (Keusch et al. 1983). Thus, the low
lymphocyte count in FR mice may be closely related to apop-
tosis in spleen and thymus. Energy restriction has been sug-
gested to enhance T cell function in aged mice by maintaining
apoptosis at levels found in younger mice, thereby removing
non- or poorly functioning T cells (Spaulding et al. 1997). It
is thus thought that immunologically less effective T cells are
eliminated in the FR mice, presumably by apoptosis, even in
the tumor-bearing state. Since CD4⫹ T cells participate in the
production of IFN-␥ in tumor-bearing mice (Yamamoto et al.
1995), the elimination of nonfunctional T cells may be one of
the important factors in improving antitumor immunity in the
FR mice.

LITERATURE CITED

Abe, K., Harada, M., Tamada, K., Ito, O., Li, T. & Nomoto, K.

(1998) Early-
appearing tumor-inﬁltrating natural killer cells play an important role in the
nitric oxide production of tumor-associated macrophages through their inter-
feron production. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 45: 225–233.

Carswell, E. A., Old, L. J., Kassel, R. L., Green, S., Fiore, N. & Williamson, B.
(1975) An endotoxin-induced serum factor that causes necrosis of tumors.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72: 3666 –3670.

Celada, A. & Maki, R. A.

IFN-␥ induces the expression of the genes for
MHC class II I-A␤ and tumor necrosis factor through a protein kinase C-
independent pathway. J. Immunol. 149: 114 –120.

(1991)

Cheney, K. E., Liu, R. K., Smith, G. S., Leung, R. E., Michey, M. R. & Walford, R. L.
(1980) Survival and diseases patterns in C57BL/6J mice subjected to under
nutrition. Exp. Gerontol. 15: 237–258.

Collart, M. A., Belin, D., Vassalli, J. D., de Kossodo, S. & Vassalli, P.

(1986)
␥-Interferon enhances macrophage transcription of the tumor necrosis factor/
cachectin, interleukin 1, and urokinase genes, which are controlled by short-
lived repressors. J. Exp. Med. 164: 2113–2118.

Comfort, A.

(1963) Effect of delayed and resumed growth on the longevity of

a ﬁsh (Lebistes reticulatus, Peters) in captivity. Gerontologia 8: 150 –155.

Feinman, R., Henriksen-Destefano, D., Tsujimoto, M. & Vilcek, J.

(1987) Tumor
necrosis factor is an important mediator of tumor cell killing by human
monocytes. J. Immunol. 138: 635– 640.

Gartner, A., Castellon, W. T., Gallon, G. & Simondon, F.

(1992) Total dietary
restriction and thymus, spleen, and phenotype and function of splenocytes in
growing mice. Nutrition 8: 258 –265.

Giovarelli, M., Cofano, F., Vecchi, A., Forni, M., Landolfo, S. & Forni, G.

(1986)
Interferon-activated tumor inhibition in vivo. Small amounts of interferon-␥
inhibit tumor growth by eliciting host systemic immunoreactivity. Int. J. Can-
cer 37: 141–148.

Han, J., Brown, T. & Beutler, B.

Endotoxin-responsive sequences
control cachectin/tumor necrosis factor biosynthesis at the translational level.
J. Exp. Med. 171: 465– 475.

(1990)

Herberman, R. B.

(1985) Natural killer (NK) cells: characteristics and possible
role in resistance against tumor growth. In Immunity to Cancer (Reif, A. E. &
Mitchell, M. S., eds.), pp. 217–229. Academic Press, New York, NY.

Higami, Y., Yu, B. P., Shimokawa, I., Bertrand, H., Hubbard, G. B. & Masoro, E. J.
(1995) Anti-tumor action of dietary restriction is lesion-dependent in male
Fisher 344 rats. J. Gerontol. Biol. Sci. 50A: B72–B77.

Hishinuma, K., Nishimura, T., Konno, A., Hashimoto, Y. & Kimura, S.

(1988)
The effect of dietary restriction on mouse T cell functions. Immunol. Lett. 17:
351–356.

Hishinuma, K., Nishimura, T., Konno, A., Hashimoto, Y. & Kimura, S.

(1990)
Augmentation of mouse immune functions by dietary restriction: An investi-
gation up to 1 year of age. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 34: 76 – 84.

Jiang, H., Stewart, C. A., Fast, D. J. & Leu, R. W.

(1992) Tumor target-derived
soluble factor synergizes with IFN-␥ and IL-2 to activate macrophages for
tumor necrosis factor and nitric oxide production to mediate cytotoxicity of
the same target. J. Immunol. 149: 2137–2146.

Keusch, G. T., Wilson, C. S. & Waksal, S. D.

(1983) Nutrition, host defenses
and the lymphoid system. In: Advances in Host Defense Mechanisms. (Gallun,
J. I. & Fauci, A. S., eds.) Vol. 2., pp. 275–359. Raven, New York, NY.

Kolaja, K. L., Bunting, K. A. & Klaunig, J. E.

Inhibition of tumor promo-
tion and hepatocellular growth by dietary restriction in mice. Carcinogenesis
17: 1657–1664.

(1996)

Konno, A., Hishinuma, K., Hashimoto, Y., Kimura, S. & Nishimura, T.

(1991)
Dietary restriction reduces the incidence of 3-methylcholanthrene-induced

FIGURE 5 Effect of food restriction (FR) on natural killer (NK) cell
cytotoxicity after tumor inoculation. FR and control mice at 12-wk-old
were inoculated with L1210 tumor cells, and NK cell cytotoxicity on
splenocytes was examined after the inoculation. Values are means
⫾ SD, n ⫽ 4. *: P ⬍ 0.05 compared with the control mice at the
corresponding time point. #: P ⬍ 0.05 compared with a value at just
before the inoculation (0 wk) in each group.

originally deﬁned by its antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo
(Carswell et al. 1975, Feinman et al. 1987, Sugarman et al.
1985), has been reported to be mainly produced by macro-
phages after stimulation with IFN-␥ (Collart et al. 1986,
Celada and Maki 1991, Han et al. 1990). L1210 leukemia
cells, which were used in this experiment, are insensitive to
TNF-␣ cytolysis in vitro (Leu et al. 1991), whereas the IFN-␥
receptor is expressed in this cell line (Wietzerbin et al. 1986).
It has also been reported that macrophage-mediated cytotox-
icity of L1210 cells is augmented by IFN-␥ in synergy with
interleukin-2 or lipopolysaccharide in vitro, and TNF-␣ par-
ticipates in the cytotoxic mechanism to produce nitric oxide
by an autocrine mechanism in macrophages (Jiang et al.
1992). Our data (Fig. 4) indicate that in the normal state,
IFN-␥ and TNF-␣ levels are signiﬁcantly greater in the 60%
FR group compared to the control. Furthermore, the FR mice
have greater abilities to produce IFN-␥ and TNF-␣ even after
inoculation of L1210 tumor cells, although this treatment
increases cytokine production in both FR and control groups.
We contend the activated production of IFN-␥and TNF-␣in
FR mice is related closely to the effective suppression of tumor
growth. However, detailed mechanisms by which IFN-␥ and
TNF-␣ production are stimulated by FR are unclear. It has
been reported that the CD4⫹ T cell subpopulation is aug-
mented in FR mice in both the normal and tumor-bearing
states (Gartner et al. 1992, Volk et al. 1994).

NK cells are important antitumor effectors both in vitro
and in vivo (Herberman 1985, Ortaldo and Herberman 1984),
and high NK cell cytotoxicity has been associated with reduc-
tions in tumor development (Reisenfeld et al. 1980). In the
60% FR group, but not in the control group, NK cell cytotox-
icity was signiﬁcantly augmented by the tumor inoculation
(Fig. 5), suggesting that NK cells improve antitumor immunity
in the FR mice. Since activated NK cells can produce IFN-␥
and TNF-␣ (Perussia 1991), it is thought that NK cells par-
ticipate in the active production of IFN-␥ and TNF-␣ in the
tumor-bearing FR mice.

It has been reported that FR reduces leukocyte number

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/130/1/111/4686074
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

ANTI-TUMOR IMMUNITY IN FOOD-RESTRICTED MICE

115

Perussia, B.

(1991)

Lymphokine-activated killer cells, natural killer cells and

dietary restriction. Springﬁeld, IL.

tumors in mice: close correlation with its potentiating effect on host T-cell
functions. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 33: 293–298.

Kubo, C., Day, N. K. & Good, R. A.

Inﬂuence of early or late dietary
restriction on life span and immunological parameters in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr
mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 5831–5835.

(1984)

Leu, R. W., Leu, N. R., Shannon, B. J. & Fast, D. J.

IFN-␥ differentially
modulates the susceptibility of L1210 and P815 tumor targets for macroph-
age-mediated cytotoxicity. J. Immunol. 147: 1816 –1822.

(1991)

Ortaldo, J. R. & Herberman, R. B.

(1984) Heterogeneity of natural killer cells.

Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2: 359 –394.

cytokines. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 3: 49 –55.

Reisenfeld, I., Orn, A., Gidlund, M., Axberg, I., Alm, G. V. & Wigzell, H.

(1980)
Positive correlation between in vitro NK activity and in vivo resistance towards
AKR lymphoma cells. Int. J. Cancer 25: 399 – 403.

Ross, M. H.
Seki, M., Hirashima, K. & Kobayashi, K.

(1961) Length of life and nutrition in the rats. J. Nutr. 75: 197–210.
(1981) Hematology of experimental

animals. Soft Science, Inc., Tokyo, Japan.

Spaulding, C. C., Walford, R. L. & Effros, R. B.

The accumulation of
non-replicative, non-functional, senescent T cells with age is avoided in
calorically restricted mice by an enhancement of T cell apoptosis. Mech.
Aging Dev. 93: 25–33.

(1997)

Spear-Hartley, A. & Sherman A. R.

(1994)

Food restriction and the immune

system. J. Nutr. Immunol. 3: 27–50.

Stark, G. R., Kerr, I. M., Williams, B.R.G., Silverman, R. H. & Schreiber, R. D.
(1998) How cells respond to interferons. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 227–264.
Sugarman, B. J., Aggarwal, B. B., Hass, P. E., Figari, I. S., Palladino, M. A. Jr. &
(1985) Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-␣: ef-
Shepard, H. M.
fects on proliferation of normal and transformed cells in vitro. Science 230:
943–945.

Volk, M. J., Pugh, T. D., Kim. M., Frith, C. H., Daynes, R. A., Ershler, W. B. &
Weindruch, R.
(1994) Dietary restriction from middle age attenuates age-
associated lymphoma development and interleukin 6 dysregulation in
C57BL/6 mice. Cancer Res. 54: 3054 –3061.

Weindruch, R.

(1989) Dietary restriction, tumors, and aging in rodents. J.

Gerontol. 44: 67–71.

Weindruch, R., Devens, B. H., Raff, H. V. & Walford, R. L.

Inﬂuence of
dietary restriction and aging on natural killer cell activity in mice. J. Immunol.
130: 993–996.

(1983)

Weindruch, R. & Walford, R. L.

(1988) The retardation of aging and disease by

Weindruch, R., Walford, R. L., Fligiel, S. & Guthrie, D.

(1986) The retardation of
aging in mice by dietary restriction: longevity, cancer, immunity and lifetime
energy intake. J. Nutr. 116: 641– 654.

Wietzerbin, J., Gaudelet, C., Aguet, M. & Falcoff, E.

(1986) Binding and
cross-linking of recombinant mouse interferon-␥ to receptors in mouse leu-
kemic L1210 cells; interferon-␥ internalization and receptor down-regulation.
J. Immunol. 136: 2451–2455.

Yamamoto, N., Zou, J.-P., Li, X.-F., Takenaka, H., Noda, S., Fujii, T., Ono, S.,
Kovayashi, Y., Mukaida, N., Matsushima, K., Fujiwara, H. & Hamaoka, T.
(1995) Regulatory mechanisms for production of IFN-␥ and TNF by antitu-
mor T cells or macrophages in the tumor-bearing state. J. Immunol. 154:
2281–2290.

Yoshida, K., Inouem T., Nojima, K., Hirabayashi, Y. & Sado, T.

(1997) Caloric
restriction reduces the incidence of myeloid leukemia induced by a singly
whole-body radiation in C3H/He mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 2615–
2619.

Yu, B. P., Masaro, E. J., Murata, I., Bertrand, H. A. & Lynd, F. T.

(1982) Life
span study of SPF male rats fed ad libitum or restricted diets: longevity,
growth, lean body mass and diseases. J. Gerontol. 37: 130 –141.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/130/1/111/4686074
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

1150

THE NEW ENGLAND  JOURNAL OF MEDICINE

May 2, 1996

EFFECTS OF A COMBINATION OF BETA CAROTENE AND VITAMIN A ON LUNG CANCER AND 

CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

G

 S. O
ILBERT
 B
J
ALMES
OHN
F
 L. M
RANK

MENN

, M.D., P
.D., G
H
, M.D., M
 R. C
ARK
, J
., M.D., B
R
EYSKENS
 B
ARNHART
COTT

S

ARY

ULLEN

OODMAN

 E. G
, M.D., A

ARBARA

 V

ALANIS

, M.D., M.P.H., 

AMMAR

, M.D.*

, M.D., M.S., M

 G
NDREW
LASS
.P.H., J
, D
R
 H
 S
AMUEL
AND

ARK
, M.D., J
AMES

 D. T
AMES

, P

H

HORNQUIST
 P. K
ILLIAMS

EOGH
, J

, M.D.,
., M.D.,

R

 H. W

.D.,

Background.

Abstract
Lung  cancer  and  cardiovas-
cular  disease  are  major  causes  of  death  in  the  United
States.  It  has  been  proposed  that  carotenoids  and  reti-
noids are agents that may prevent these disorders.

Methods.

We  conducted  a  multicenter,  randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled primary prevention trial
— the Beta-Carotene and Retinol Efﬁcacy Trial — involv-
ing a total of 18,314 smokers, former smokers, and work-
ers exposed to asbestos. The effects of a combination of
30 mg of beta carotene per day and 25,000 IU of retinol
(vitamin A) in the form of retinyl palmitate per day on the
primary  end  point,  the  incidence  of  lung  cancer,  were
compared with those of placebo.

Results.

A  total  of  388  new  cases  of  lung  cancer
were diagnosed during the 73,135 person-years of follow-
up (mean length of follow-up, 4.0 years). The active-treat-
ment group had a relative risk of lung cancer of 1.28 (95
percent  conﬁdence  interval,  1.04  to  1.57;  P
0.02),  as

⫽

L

UNG cancer is the leading cause of death from can-
cer  in  the  United  States,  accounting  for  approxi-
mately 29 percent of deaths from cancer and 6 percent
of all deaths.
New approaches are essential to prevent
1 
lung cancer in persons who have smoked cigarettes or
who have had occupational exposure to asbestos. Twen-
ty-nine percent of men and 25 percent of women who
 and at least
are 45 to 64 years of age currently smoke,
40 percent of men and 20 percent of women in this age
group are former smokers.
 An estimated 4000 to 6000
3
deaths from lung cancer per year are attributed to ex-
posure to asbestos.

On the basis of epidemiologic observations and lab-
oratory  studies,  beta  carotene  and  vitamin  A  have  at-
tracted  wide  interest  as  agents  that  may  prevent  lung
cancer.
 The Beta-Carotene and Retinol Efﬁcacy Trial
(CARET)  is  one  of  several  recent  trials  to  assess  the

6-9

4,5

2

From  the  Division  of  Public  Health  Sciences,  Fred  Hutchinson  Cancer  Re-
search Center, Seattle (G.S.O., G.E.G., M.D.T., S.B.); the Departments of Envi-
ronmental  Health  and  Medicine,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle  (G.S.O.,
G.E.G., S.B., S.H.); the Swedish Hospital Tumor Institute, Seattle (G.E.G.); the
Department  of  Medicine,  University  of  California  at  San  Francisco,  San  Fran-
cisco  (J.B.);  the  Department  of  Medicine, Yale  University,  New  Haven,  Conn.
(M.R.C.); Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research, Portland, Oreg. (A.G.,
B.V.); the Department of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore (J.P.K.);
and the Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, University of California at
Irvine,  Orange  (F.L.M.,  J.H.W.). Address  reprint  requests  to  Dr.  Omenn  at  the
Fred  Hutchinson  Cancer  Research  Center,  Division  of  Public  Health  Sciences,
1124 Columbia–MP859, Seattle, WA 98104. 

Supported  by  grants  (U01  CA63673,  U01  CA63674,  U01  CA47989,  U01
CA48200, U01 CA48203, U01 CA48196, and U01 CA52596) from the National
Cancer Institute.

*Other contributing authors were Carl Andrew Brodkin, M.D. (University of
Washington, Seattle), Martin G. Cherniack, M.D. (Yale University, New Haven,
Conn.), James E. Grizzle, Ph.D. (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Se-
attle),  Marjorie  Perloff,  M.D.  (National  Cancer  Institute,  Bethesda,  Md.),  and
Linda Rosenstock, M.D., M.P.H. (University of Washington, Seattle).

compared with the placebo group. There were no statis-
tically signiﬁcant differences in the risks of other types of
cancer. In the active-treatment group, the relative risk of
death  from  any  cause  was  1.17  (95  percent  conﬁdence
interval, 1.03 to 1.33); of death from lung cancer, 1.46 (95
percent  conﬁdence  interval,  1.07  to  2.00);  and  of  death
from cardiovascular disease, 1.26 (95 percent conﬁdence
interval, 0.99 to 1.61). On the basis of these ﬁndings, the
randomized  trial  was  stopped  21  months  earlier  than
planned; follow-up will continue for another 5 years.

Conclusions.

After  an  average  of  four  years  of  sup-
plementation, the combination of beta carotene and vita-
min A had no beneﬁt and may have had an adverse effect
on the incidence of lung cancer and on the risk of death
from lung cancer, cardiovascular disease, and any cause
in smokers and workers exposed to asbestos. (N  Engl J
Med 1996;334:1150-5.)

1996, Massachusetts Medical Society.

10-13

chemopreventive  efﬁcacy  and  safety  of  beta  carotene
and related agents.

This  report  presents  interim  efﬁcacy  results  of  the
CARET study, which coincided with the announcement
of the steering committee’s decision on January 11, 1996,
to stop the trial’s active intervention. Follow-up for ad-
ditional end points is expected to continue for another
ﬁve years.

M

ETHODS

Study Design

9,14-16

The  study’s  strategy,  design,  detailed  methods,  eligibility,  pilot-
study ﬁndings, and recruitment information have been published else-
where.
  Brieﬂy,  CARET  was  organized  in  1983  and  began  ran-
domization in Seattle in 1985 in two pilot studies: one enrolled 816
men  with  substantial  occupational  exposure  to  asbestos,  who  were
randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive either a combination of
15 mg of beta carotene per day and 25,000 IU of retinol per day (ac-
tive treatment) or placebo; the second enrolled 1029 men and women
with extensive histories of cigarette smoking, to receive 30 mg of beta
carotene per day, 25,000 IU of retinol per day, both vitamins, or nei-
ther vitamin (two-by-two design). The trial was expanded to include
additional study centers in 1988 and 1991, and all subjects were ran-
domly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to either active treatment or placebo.
The  pilot  groups  receiving  active  agents  were  consolidated  in  1988
into a single group receiving a standard daily regimen of 30 mg of
beta carotene plus 25,000 IU of retinol in the form of retinyl palmi-
tate. Thus, in the pilot study with the cohort of smokers, three sub-
jects were assigned to active treatment for every subject assigned to
placebo; therefore, the rates rather than numbers of end points must
 called
be compared between active and placebo groups. The design
14
for active intervention until late 1997 (110,000 person-years), with re-
porting of results in 1998.

Eligibility, Recruitment, and Randomization

Workers exposed to asbestos were men 45 to 74 years of age in
the pilot study and 45 to 69 years of age in the later period of re-

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1996 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

Vol. 334 No. 18

BETA CAROTENE AND VITAMIN A IN LUNG CANCER AND CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

1151

15

cruitment. To be eligible for the study the subjects had to have ﬁrst
been exposed to asbestos on the job 15 years before randomization,
and either have had a chest x-ray ﬁlm positive for asbestos-related
lung  disease  or  have  worked  in  speciﬁed  high-risk  trades  —  as
plumbers and pipe ﬁtters, steamﬁtters, shipyard boilermakers, non-
shipyard boilermakers, shipyard electricians, ship scalers, insulators,
plasterboard workers, or sheet-metal workers — for 5 years. The as-
; subse-
bestos pilot study had no requirements regarding smoking
quently,  subjects  were  required  to  be  current  smokers  or  to  have
smoked within the previous 15 years. For the population of smokers,
women  and  men  were  recruited  from  health  insurance  rolls  and
managed-care organizations if they were 50 to 69 years of age, had
at least 20 pack-years of cigarette smoking, and either were currently
smoking or had quit smoking within the previous six years. The par-
ticipants agreed to limit their supplemental intake of vitamin A to
less than 5500 IU per day and to take no supplemental beta caro-
tene. A total of 4060 workers exposed to asbestos and 14,254 heavy
smokers (44 percent of whom were women) were randomized. We
provided detailed information for informed consent at recruitment
and  regularly  thereafter,  including  a  letter  to  each  participant  de-
scribing  the  results  of  the  1994  Alpha-Tocopherol,  Beta  Carotene
Cancer Prevention Study (ATBC).
 
10

Active  agents  and  placebos  were  purchased  from  Hoffmann–
LaRoche and formulated by Tishcon Corporation. Both formulations
were given as capsules. Beta carotene beadlets were combined with
retinyl palmitate in a single capsule and dispensed in bottles, which
were weighed and their contents checked. We assessed the subjects’
compliance by weighing the returned bottles to estimate the number
of capsules remaining (in 85 percent of the assessments) or by relying
on the subjects’ own estimates (15 percent). Blood was collected an-
nually from the original pilot participants and every two years from
the other participants.

Subjects who stopped receiving study vitamins for any reason other
than  death  were  deﬁned  as  inactive  participants  and  were  still  fol-
lowed for end points and counted in the analyses.

Data Collection and Monitoring of Safety

and End Points
Each year active participants visited a study center once and were
telephoned  twice,  at  four-month  intervals.  Inactive  participants
were telephoned semiannually. Over 97 percent of scheduled contacts
were completed. As of December 15, 1995, ascertainment of vital sta-
tus was more than 98 percent complete.

Symptoms and signs and newly diagnosed medical conditions were
monitored  closely  by  questionnaire  at  all  contacts  and  in  limited
physical  examinations  during  study-center  visits;  laboratory  values
for  liver  function  and  serum  analytes  were  monitored  annually  in
participants  randomized  in  the  pilot  studies  (for  use  in  adjusting
estimates of relative risk with the case–cohort approach).
 The 13
17
monitored symptoms were graded according to the CARET symp-
tom-assessment scale.
 An independent safety and end-points mon-
16
itoring  committee  met  semiannually  to  review  in  blinded  fashion
data  coded  according to intervention group. When the results of the
ATBC Cancer Prevention trial
 became available, the committee re-
viewed the results of the ﬁrst interim analysis and requested that the
blinding  be  ended.  Subsequently,  the  committee  reviewed  data  un-
blinded.

10

Ascertainment and Evaluation of End Points

All  initial  reports  of  cancers  and  deaths  from  each  study  center
were submitted to the coordinating center and entered into a tracking
system. Participants and all study staff members involved in the as-
certainment and evaluation of end points and assignment of ﬁnal di-
agnoses remained unaware of the participants’ treatment assignment
throughout the trial. Clinical records and, for tumors involving the
lung, pathology specimens were obtained for independent review by
the end-points review committee, composed of two oncologists, two
internists, and a pathologist. An end point was considered conﬁrmed
when the end-point review process was completed. Through Decem-
ber 15, 1995, a total of 2420 end points had been reported: 1446 can-
cers (in 1353 participants) and 974 deaths. Of the initial reports of

lung cancer for which the end-point–review process was completed,
90 percent were conﬁrmed; most of the remainder were found to be
metastases and recurrences.

Statistical Analysis

The primary analysis, based on the intention to treat, was designed
to test for differences between treatment groups in the incidence of
lung cancer with a weighted log-rank statistic stratiﬁed according to
the risk group (workers exposed to asbestos or heavy smokers), time
of recruitment (pilot study or subsequent period), and study center
(six centers).
 Parameter estimates and the results of statistical tests
14
were similar with and without the weighting; we present here the un-
weighted results. Estimates of relative risk and conﬁdence intervals
were obtained from stratiﬁed Cox regression models with the same
strata  as  the  log-rank  statistics.  The  cumulative  incidence  of  end
⁄
points was plotted through 5
 years of follow-up because of the small
1
2
number  of  participants  beyond  that  time  and  involved  354  partici-
pants with new cases of lung cancer, 829 deaths, and 67,449 person-
years of follow-up. Follow-up for all participants began at randomi-
zation.

The prespeciﬁed monitoring policy for stopping the trial early be-
cause of a beneﬁt or adverse effect of the study vitamins was based
on O’Brien–Fleming boundaries
 applied to the weighted number of
18
conﬁrmed lung-cancer end points, the primary end point. The critical
P values were those of 0.0006 or lower for the ﬁrst interim analysis
in 1994 and those of 0.007 or lower for the second interim analysis in
1995. Results are based on active intervention through December 15,
1995, at which time the 18,314 participants had accumulated 73,135
person-years of follow-up (mean, 4.0 years; median, 3.7).

R

ESULTS

Characteristics of the Participants

The two randomized groups were well matched, with
a high-risk proﬁle for lung cancer and cardiovascular
disease in both the smokers and the workers exposed
to asbestos (Table 1). All smokers were encouraged and
assisted, if willing, to stop smoking, and all former smok-
ers  were  encouraged  to  maintain  that  status.  Among
current smokers, there was a net smoking-cessation rate
of 5 percent per year.

Through  December  15,  1995,  15  percent  of  the
workers exposed to asbestos who were assigned to ac-
tive  treatment  became  inactive  participants,  as  com-
pared  with  14  percent  of  those  assigned  to  placebo.
The  respective  values  in  the  group  of  heavy  smokers
were 20 percent and 19 percent. Among the active par-
ticipants, the mean rates of capsule consumption were
93 percent through ﬁve years of follow-up, with no sig-
niﬁcant  differences  between  treatment  groups.  The
percentage of participants who took non–study-relat-
ed  supplemental  beta  carotene  or  vitamin  A  in  doses
of more than 5500 IU per day was low (2 percent and
1 percent, respectively). After ﬁve years of study sup-
plementation, the median serum beta carotene concen-
tration in the active-treatment group was 2100 ng per
milliliter, as compared with 170 ng per milliliter in the
placebo group; serum retinol levels were about 10 per-
0.01).
cent higher than those in the placebo group (P
Except  for  slight  skin  yellowing  in  some  of  those  re-
ceiving  beta  carotene  (0.3  percent  had  yellowing  of
grade 3 or higher on the CARET symptom-assessment
scale),
  there  were  no  differences  of  clinical  impor-
16
tance between groups in any of the 13 monitored symp-

⬍

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1996 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

1152

THE NEW ENGLAND  JOURNAL OF MEDICINE

May 2, 1996

toms and signs, in tests of liver function, or in newly di-
agnosed conditions.

Incidence of Lung Cancer

The  incidence  of  lung  cancer  was  the  primary  end
point. Through December 15, 1995, 388 participants —
2 percent of the total — were reported to have new cas-
es  of  lung  cancer  (5.4  per  1000  person-years).  In  the
case of 286, the end points were conﬁrmed, whereas in
the case of 102, further review by the end-points com-
mittee was pending. Among the 388, 254 had died. Five
participants  had  two  primary  lung  cancers  each.  The
388 participants represent 79 percent of the 490 partic-
ipants  projected  in  our  statistical  design  to  have  lung
cancer by the end of the intervention. The 73,135 per-
son-years  of  follow-up  accrued  correspond  to  66  per-
cent of the total of 110,000 person-years projected.
14

The active-treatment group had a relative risk of lung
cancer  of  1.28  (95  percent  conﬁdence  interval,  1.04  to
1.57;  P
0.02),  as  compared  with  the  placebo  group
(Table 2). This result includes relative risks of 1.40 (95
percent conﬁdence interval, 0.95 to 2.07) for workers ex-
posed to asbestos, 1.42 (95 percent conﬁdence interval,
1.07 to 1.87) for heavy smokers who were smoking at the
time of randomization, and 0.80 (95 percent conﬁdence
interval,  0.48  to  1.31)  for  heavy  smokers  who  were  no
longer smoking at the time of randomization. There was
no  statistical  evidence  of  heterogeneity  of  the  relative
risk among these subgroups. Figure 1 shows the cumu-
lative incidence of lung cancer after randomization; the
incidence  in  the  active-treatment  and  placebo  groups
was virtually identical for the ﬁrst 18 months. There was
no  statistically  signiﬁcant  effect  of  the  intervention  on

⫽

 

Table 1. Risk Factors among the Participants at Base Line.
 
*

survival after the diagnosis of lung cancer (relative risk
of survival after diagnosis of lung cancer in the active-
treatment group as compared with the placebo group,
1.05; 95 percent conﬁdence interval, 0.80 to 1.37).

Incidence of Other Cancers

Active  treatment  had  no  statistically  signiﬁcant  ef-
fect on the risk of mesothelioma. There were 23 cases:
14 in the active-treatment group and 9 in the placebo
group.  The  remaining  1030  new  cases  of  cancer  (in-
cluding the 300 prostate cancers, the second most com-
mon cancer in this population) were distributed nearly
evenly between the two treatment groups.

Mortality Rates

⫽

⫽

As shown in Table 2 and Figure 2, the mortality rate
was  17  percent  higher  in  the  active-treatment  group
than in the placebo group (P
0.02). Among the pop-
ulation of heavy smokers, the relative risk was not sig-
niﬁcantly different between those who were smoking at
the time of randomization and those who were no long-
er smoking at that time (relative risk, 1.15 vs. 1.06).

Analysis according to the cause of death (conﬁrmed
causes  only;  n
764)  showed  that  in  the  active-treat-
ment group, as compared with the placebo group, the
relative risk of death from any cause was 1.18 (95 per-
cent conﬁdence interval, 1.02 to 1.37); of death from lung
cancer, 1.46 (95 percent conﬁdence interval, 1.07 to 2.00);
and of death from cardiovascular causes 
codes 390 to
(
459 and 798 of the 
International Classiﬁcation of  Diseases,
), 1.26 (95 percent con-
9th Revision, Clinical Modiﬁcation
ﬁdence  interval,  0.99  to  1.61).  As  shown  in  Figure  2,
there  was  no  signiﬁcant  difference  between  treatment
groups in the incidence of death from
all causes during the ﬁrst 24 months.
A  review  of  all  causes  of  death  re-
vealed no additional statistically sig-
niﬁcant differences between the treat-
ment groups.
D

ISCUSSION

PLACEBO

MOKERS

H

EAVY

 S

ACTIVE

 

TREATMENT

7376†
⫾
58
5

CARET  was  initiated  in  1983  to
test the hypothesis that beta carotene
and  vitamin  A,  through  comple-
mentary antioxidant and differentia-
tion-promoting  actions  and  possibly
through  immunologic  protective  ef-
fects,  could  reduce  the  incidence  of
lung cancer in high-risk populations.
The  trial  met  high  standards  for
accrual, efﬁciency, quality assurance,
and  ascertainment  of  end  points.
There  have  been  no  side  effects  at-
tributable  to  the  intervention  regi-
men. The participants have shown a
high level of commitment to the trial. 
The  results  of  the  trial  are  trou-
bling.  There  was  no  support  for  a

C

HARACTERISTIC

W

ORKERS

 E

XPOSED

 

TO

 A

SBESTOS

ACTIVE

 

TREATMENT

PLACEBO

No. randomized
Age — yr
Female sex — no. (%)
Race or ethnic group — no. (%)

White
Black
Hispanic
Other or unknown

Smoking status — no. (%)

Never smoked
Former smoker
Current smoker

Cigarettes smoked/day

Former smokers
Current smokers

Pack-years of smoking‡
Years since quitting smoking§

2044
⫾
57
7
0

1805 (88)
152 (7)
36 (2)
51 (2)

68 (3)
1195 (58)
781 (38)

25
24
43
10

⫾
12
⫾
10
⫾
24
⫾
8

2016
⫾
57
7
0

1775 (88)
153 (8)
43 (2)
45 (2)

64 (3)
1175 (58)
777 (39)

25
25
42
10

⫾
12
⫾
10
⫾
24
⫾
8

6878†
⫾
58
5

3208 (43)

3081 (45)

7000 (95)
103 (1)
101 (1)
172 (2)

0

2473 (34)
4903 (66)

⫾
11
28
⫾
24
9
⫾
21
50
⫾
3
2

6487 (94)
122 (2)
95 (1)
174 (3)

0

2331 (34)
4547 (66)

⫾
11
28
⫾
24
8
⫾
20
49
⫾
3
2

*Plus–minus values are means 
†The imbalance in the numbers is due to the assignment of 3 pilot participants to active treatment for every 1 assigned to

SD. Because of rounding, not all columns total 100 percent.

⫾

placebo (773 to active treatment vs. 256 to placebo).
‡Only former and current smokers were included.
§Only former smokers were included.

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1996 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. Vol. 334 No. 18

BETA CAROTENE AND VITAMIN A IN LUNG CANCER AND CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

1153

Table 2. Incidence and Estimated Relative Risk of Lung Cancer and Death from All Causes.
*

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

G

ROUP

N

O

. 

OF

 S

UBJECTS

U
NREFUTED
L
 C
UNG
P
ERSON

 C
ANCER

 

 

ASES
OF
/1000

ACTIVE

 

ACTIVE

 

-

YR

L

UNG

 C

ANCER

RELATIVE

 

D
EATHS
P
ERSON

/1000
-
YR

ACTIVE 

D

EATH

 

FROM

 A

LL

 C

AUSES

RELATIVE 

TREATMENT

PLACEBO

TREATMENT

PLACEBO

P 

VALUE

†

RISK‡

95% CI

TREATMENT

PLACEBO

P VALUE†

RISK‡

95% CI

All subjects
Workers exposed 

to asbestos

Heavy smokers

9420
2044

7376

8894
2016

6878

5.92
6.05

5.87

4.62
4.33

4.74

0.02
0.08

0.09

1.28
1.40

1.04–1.57
0.95–2.07

14.45
17.76

11.91
14.30

1.23

0.96–1.56

13.26

10.91

0.02
0.04

0.14

1.17
1.25

1.03–1.33
1.01–1.56

1.13

0.96–1.32

*CI denotes conﬁdence interval.
†The P values were calculated by two-sided log-rank tests stratiﬁed according to the risk group (workers exposed to asbestos or heavy smokers), time of recruitment (pilot study or subsequent

period), and study center (six centers).

‡Estimated relative risk in the active-treatment group as compared with the placebo group. The log-rank test, stratiﬁed according to risk group, time of recruitment, and study center, was used

to estimate the relative risk.

 

beneﬁcial effect of beta carotene or vitamin A, in spite of
the large advantages inferred from observational epide-
miologic  comparisons  of  extreme  quintiles  or  quartiles
of dietary intake of fruits and vegetables or of dietary in-
take or serum levels of beta carotene or vitamin A.
19,20
With 73,135 person-years of follow-up, the active-treat-
ment group had a 28 percent higher incidence of lung
cancer than the placebo group, and the overall mortality
rate  and  the  rate  of  death  from  cardiovascular  causes
were higher by 17 percent and 26 percent, respectively.
These  results  conﬁrm  and  extend  the  unexpected
results reported for beta carotene in the ATBC Cancer
Prevention  Study  in  Finland.
  We  cannot  distinguish
10
the  effects  of  beta  carotene  from  those  of  vitamin  A,
since the two agents were administered in combination,
under the hypothesis that they might have a favorable
effect through complementary molecular actions.
9

The second interim analysis led our safety and end-
points monitoring committee and steering committee to
recognize the extremely limited prospect of a favorable
overall effect, as well as the possibility of true adverse
effects. The decision to stop the intervention was made
by the steering committee on January 11, 1996. It is pos-
sible that the excess mortality in the active-treatment
group may have vanished or become statistically insig-
niﬁcant  with  completion  of  the  intended  intervention
period plus several years of follow-up; such reversals of
ﬁndings  have  occurred  both  in  the  course  of  a  single
 and in subsequent random-
large, randomized trial
ized  trials  of  the  same  agent  or  class  of  agents.
23-25
However, it was impossible to ignore the results of the
ATBC Cancer Prevention Study
 in deciding whether
10
to stop the active-intervention phase.

We have no explanation for the possible adverse as-
sociations that we have observed to date. There was no
evidence of systemic toxicity in any organ from the vi-
tamin A or, except for the expected skin yellowing, the
beta carotene. The regimen did not produce clinically
important  hypertriglyceridemia.
  We  considered  con-
tinuing the trial with the retinyl palmitate alone; how-
ever, the need to rerandomize, the extended follow-up
required, and the uncertainty about the involvement of
the vitamin A made this plan infeasible.

21,22

26

27,28

In this trial, beta carotene treatment raised the me-
dian serum beta carotene levels to 12 times the base-
line levels and the placebo group’s median values. Such
levels may conceivably be toxic or at least cause serious
disequilibrium with other compounds important to re-
dox relations or other cellular mechanisms. Beta caro-
tene has been postulated to have a pro-oxidant effect
under certain nonphysiologic conditions.
 One study
reported that the administration of beta carotene dras-
tically  lowered  vitamin  E  levels,
  and  three
 have found no such effect. In prelim-
other groups
inary analyses of serum beta carotene levels during ac-
tive treatment, we could ﬁnd no support for the hypoth-
esis that subjects with the highest serum levels of beta
carotene were at greater risk for lung cancer or death
from cardiovascular causes, cancer, or any cause.

  but  we

The results of our study and the ATBC Cancer Pre-
vention Study
 in populations at high risk for lung can-
10
cer  and  cardiovascular  disease  and  the  ﬁnding  of  the
 of no beneﬁt or harm after 12
Physicians’ Health Study
11
years of beta carotene treatment clearly do not support

10,31,32

29

30

f

o

 

)

%

(
 
r
e
c
n
a
C
 
g
n
u
L

i

e
c
n
e
d
c
n
I
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
C

l

4

3

2

1

0

0

Active treatment

Placebo

12

24

36

48

60

72

Months after Randomization

Figure 1. Kaplan–Meier Curves of the Cumulative Incidence of
Lung  Cancer  among  Participants  Receiving  Active  Treatment

and Those Receiving Placebo.

Data are shown only through 51⁄2 years of follow-up because of

the small numbers of participants beyond that time.

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1996 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. (cid:0)
1154

THE NEW ENGLAND  JOURNAL OF MEDICINE

May 2, 1996

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
l

a

t
r
o
M
e
v
i
t

 

l

a
u
m
u
C

10
9
8

7

6

5

4
3
2

1

0

Active treatment
Placebo

All causes

Cardiovascular

causes

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

Months after Randomization

Figure 2. Kaplan–Meier Curves of the Cumulative Incidence of
Death  from  All  Causes  and  Conﬁrmed  Cardiovascular  Causes
among Participants Receiving Active Treatment and Those Re-

Data are shown only through 51⁄2 years of follow-up because of

the small numbers of participants beyond that time.

ceiving Placebo.

the widely accepted conclusion drawn from observation-
al epidemiologic studies that beta carotene is a primary
component responsible for the association of lower risks
of  cancer  and  death  from  cardiovascular  causes  with
high  intakes  of  fruits  and  vegetables.19,33  Such  studies
typically  compare  extreme  subgroups  for  such  dietary
features,  ignoring  or  only  crudely  adjusting  for  many
other potentially relevant variables, such as the intake of
red meat, physical activity, life situations, and other be-
havior.20 The dietary associations seemed well matched
to serum beta carotene measurements; as in other obser-
vational analyses, in our study base-line serum beta car-
otene  levels  were  inversely  correlated  with  the  subse-
quent incidence of lung cancer in both groups. However,
randomized prevention trials are needed to test the hy-
pothesis that increased beta carotene intake can be pro-
tective.

The results of four large-scale chemoprevention tri-
als of beta carotene and related agents can be summa-
rized. The ATBC Cancer Prevention Study10 tested dai-
ly supplementation with 20 mg of beta carotene and 50
mg of alpha-tocopherol (two-by-two factorial design) in
29,133  male  smokers.  The  Physicians’  Health  Study11
tested supplementation with 50 mg of beta carotene on
alternate days in 22,071 male physicians, 50 percent of
whom  had  never  smoked,  39  percent  of  whom  were
former smokers, and 11 percent of whom were currently
smoking. We tested daily supplementation with a com-
bination of 30 mg of beta carotene and 25,000 IU of ret-
inyl  palmitate.  Finally,  a  study  conducted  in  Linxian,
China,34  assessed  the  value  of  daily  supplementation
with a combination of 15 mg of beta carotene, 50 mg of
selenium, and 30 mg of alpha-tocopherol as compared
with three other combinations of vitamins and minerals
in a complex factorial design in 29,584 adults presumed

to be vitamin- and mineral-deﬁcient — a very different
population from those examined in the other studies. In
the ATBC Cancer Prevention Study, 876 new cases of
lung cancer were diagnosed, yielding a relative risk of
lung cancer of 1.18 among subjects who received beta
carotene  (with  or  without  alpha-tocopherol),  as  com-
pared with those who did not. In the Physicians’ Health
Study, 170 new cases of lung cancer were diagnosed, for
a relative risk of lung cancer of 0.93 among men taking
beta  carotene,  as  compared  with  those  who  received
placebo. In our study, there were 388 new cases of lung
cancer,  yielding  a  relative  risk  of  such  cancer  of  1.28
among the subjects who received beta carotene and ret-
inyl  palmitate,  as  compared  with  those  who  received
placebo.  The  Linxian  study  did  not  report  the  inci-
dence of lung cancer. Among the subjects who received
beta carotene, the relative risk of death from any cause
was  1.08  in  the  ATBC  Cancer Prevention Study  (3570
deaths),  1.01  in  the  Physicians’  Health  Study  (1947
deaths), 1.17 in our trial (974 deaths), and 0.91 in the
Linxian study (2127 deaths).

Reversing or overcoming lifelong metabolic or exog-
enous risk factors may require 5 to 10 years or more to
account for the latent periods of cancers. Favorable ef-
fects may be particularly difﬁcult to achieve in the face
of a continuing carcinogenic and atherogenic assault in
smokers;  alternatively,  antioxidants  and  antiprolifera-
tive  agents  might  act  on  the  constituents  of  cigarette
smoke. Long-term follow-up both during and after ac-
tive treatment with potential chemopreventive agents is
essential if we are to have any hope of observing long-
term  beneﬁts  and  evaluating  long-term  risks.  During
the postintervention follow-up of our study subjects, as
end points continue to accrue, we will conduct labora-
tory analyses and analyze various subgroups, particu-
larly former smokers.

Our ﬁndings provide important new information with
respect to public policy and public health. When these
results are combined with those from the ATBC Cancer
Prevention Study10 and the Physicians’ Health Study,11
they make it clear that there can be little enthusiasm
about the efﬁcacy or safety of supplemental beta caro-
tene  or  vitamin  A  in  efforts  to  reduce  the  burdens  of
cancer or heart disease in certain populations. Howev-
er, we still recommend the dietary intake of fruits and
vegetables.

Other agents that prevent lung cancer and coronary
heart disease must be identiﬁed and subjected to rig-
orous  trials  of  safety  and  efﬁcacy.  Meanwhile,  to  re-
duce the risk of these diseases we must rely primarily
on three approaches: smoking cessation, prevention of
smoking, and avoidance of occupational and environ-
mental exposure to carcinogenic substances.

We are indebted to the study subjects, staff members, and investi-
gators; to the members of the safety and end-points monitoring com-
mittee  over  the  past  several  years  (Anthony  Miller,  Robert  Bruce,
Julie Buring, Frank Iber, and O. Dale Williams); and to our colleagues
who provided data from the Physicians’ Health Study.

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1996 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. Vol. 334 No. 18

BETA CAROTENE AND VITAMIN A IN LUNG CANCER AND CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

1155

1. Wingo  PA,  Tong  T,  Bolden  S.  Cancer  statistics,  1995.  CA  Cancer  J  Clin

19. Steinmetz KA, Potter JD. Vegetables, fruit, and cancer. Cancer Causes Con-

REFERENCES

18. Fleming  TR,  Harrington  DP,  O’Brien  PC.  Designs  for  group  sequential

tests. Controlled Clin Trials 1984;5:348-61.

1995;45:8-30. [Erratum, CA Cancer J Clin 1995;45:127-8.]

2. Cigarette  smoking  among  adults  —  United  States,  1991.  MMWR  Morb

Mortal Wkly Rep 1993;42:230-3.

3. National Center for Health Statistics, Schoenborn CA, Boyd GM. Smoking
and other tobacco use: United States, 1987. Vital and Health Statistics. Se-
ries  10.  No.  169.  Washington,  D.C.:  Government  Printing  Ofﬁce,  1989.
(DHHS publication no. (PHS) 89-1597.)

4. Nicholson  WJ,  Perkel  G,  Selikoff  IJ.  Occupational  exposure  to  asbestos:
population  at  risk  and  projected  mortality  —  1980-2030. Am  J  Ind  Med
1982;3:259-311.

5. Omenn GS, Merchant J, Boatman E, et al. Contribution of environmental

ﬁbers to respiratory cancer. Environ Health Perspect 1986;70:51-6.

6. Peto R, Doll R, Buckley JD, Sporn MB. Can dietary beta-carotene materi-

ally reduce human cancer rates? Nature 1981;290:201-8.

7. Greenwald P. NCI cancer prevention and control research. Prev Med 1993;

22:642-60.

8. Lippman SM, Benner SE, Hong WK. Retinoid chemoprevention studies in
upper  aerodigestive  tract  and  lung  carcinogenesis.  Cancer  Res  1994;54:
Suppl:2025s-2028s.

9. Omenn GS, Goodman G, Thornquist M, et al. The b-Carotene and Retinol
Efﬁcacy  Trial  (CARET)  for  chemoprevention  of  lung  cancer  in  high  risk
populations: smokers and asbestos-exposed workers. Cancer Res 1994;54:
Suppl:2038s-2043s.

10. The  Alpha-Tocopherol,  Beta  Carotene  Cancer  Prevention  Study  Group.
The effect of vitamin E and beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer
and other cancers in male smokers. N Engl J Med 1994;330:1029-35.

11. Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Manson JE, et al. Lack of effect of long-term
supplementation  with  beta  carotene  on  the  incidence  of  malignant  neo-
plasms and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 1996;334:1145-9.

12. Buring  JE,  Hennekens  CH.  The  Women’s  Health  Study:  summary  of  the

study design. J Myocardial Ischemia 1992;4:27-9.

13. Manson JE, Gaziano JM, Spelsberg A, et al. A secondary prevention trial
of antioxidant vitamins and cardiovascular disease in women: rationale, de-
sign, and methods. Ann Epidemiol 1995;5:261-9.

14. Thornquist  MD,  Omenn  GS,  Goodman  GE,  et  al.  Statistical  design  and
monitoring of the Carotene and Retinol Efﬁcacy Trial (CARET). Controlled
Clin Trials 1993;14:308-24.

15. Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, et al. The Carotene and Retinol
Efﬁcacy Trial (CARET) to prevent lung cancer in high-risk populations: pi-
lot  study  with  asbestos-exposed  workers.  Cancer  Epidemiol  Biomarkers
Prev 1993;2:381-7.

16. Goodman  GE,  Omenn  GS,  Thornquist  MD,  Lund  B,  Metch  B,  Gylys-
Colwell  I.  The  Carotene  and  Retinol  Efﬁcacy  Trial  (CARET)  to  prevent
lung  cancer  in  high-risk  populations:  pilot  study  with  cigarette  smokers.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1993;2:389-96.

17. Prentice RL. A case-cohort design for epidemiologic cohort studies and dis-

ease prevention trials. Biometrika 1986;73:1-11.

trol 1991;2:325-57, 427-42.

21.

20. Omenn GS. What accounts for the association of vegetables and fruit with
lower  incidence  of  cancers  and  coronary  heart  disease?  Ann  Epidemiol
1995;5:333-5.
ISIS-1 (First International Study of Infarct Survival) Collaborative Group.
Randomised trial of intravenous atenolol among 16 027 cases of suspected
acute myocardial infarction: ISIS-1. Lancet 1986;2:57-66.
ISIS-4  (Fourth  International  Study  of  Infarct  Survival)  Collaborative
Group.  ISIS-4:  a  randomised  factorial  trial  assessing  early  oral  capto-
pril,  oral  mononitrate,  and  intravenous  magnesium  sulphate  in  58  050
patients  with  suspected  acute  myocardial  infarction.  Lancet  1995;345:
669-85.

22.

23. Aspirin Myocardial Infarction Study Research Group. A randomized, con-
trolled  trial  of  aspirin  in  persons  recovered  from  myocardial  infarction.
JAMA 1980;243:661-9.
ISIS-2  (Second  International  Study  of  Infarct  Survival)  Collaborative
Group. Randomised trial of intravenous streptokinase, oral aspirin, both, or
neither among 17 187 cases of suspected acute myocardial infarction: ISIS-
2. Lancet 1988;2:349-60.

24.

25. Yusuf S, Sleight P, Rossi P, et al. Reduction in infarct size, arrhythmias and
chest pain by early intravenous beta blockade in suspected acute myocardial
infarction. Circulation 1983;67:132-41.

26. Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist M, Brunzell JD. Long-term vitamin
A does not produce clinically signiﬁcant hypertriglyceridemia: results from
CARET, the b-Carotene and Retinol Efﬁcacy Trial. Cancer Epidemiol Bio-
markers Prev 1994;3:711-3.

27. Burton GW, Ingold KU. b-Carotene: an unusual type of lipid antioxidant.

Science 1984;224:569-73.

28. Krinsky  NI.  Actions  of  carotenoids  in  biological  systems.  Ann  Rev  Nutr

1993;13:561-87.

29. Xu MJ, Plezia PM, Alberts DS, et al. Reduction in plasma or skin a-tocoph-
erol concentration with long-term oral administration of b-carotene in hu-
mans and mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 1992;84:1559-65.

30. Goodman GE, Metch BJ, Omenn GS. The effect of long-term b-carotene
and  vitamin  A  administration  on  serum  concentrations  of  a-tocopherol.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1994;3:429-32.

31. Nierenberg  DW,  Stukel TA,  Mott  LA,  Greenberg  ER.  Steady-state  serum
concentration  of  a  tocopherol  not  altered  by  supplementation  with  oral
b-carotene. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994;86:117-20.

32. McLarty  JW. An  intervention  trial  in  high-risk  asbestos-exposed  persons.
In: Newell GR, Hong WK, eds. The biology and prevention of aerodigestive
tract cancers. Vol. 320 of Advances in experimental medicine and biology.
New York: Plenum Press, 1992:141-9.

33. Block G, Patterson B, Subar A. Fruit, vegetables, and cancer prevention: a

review of the epidemiology evidence. Nutr Cancer 1992;18:1-29.

34. Blot WJ,  Li  J-Y, Taylor  PR,  et  al.  Nutrition  intervention  trials  in  Linxian,

China. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993;85:1483-92.

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 1996 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. Carcinogenesisvol.il  no.7  pp. 1083-1086,  1990

Paul  C.Billings,  Paul  M.Newberne1  and  Ann  R.Kennedy

Department  of  Radiation  Oncology,  University  of  Pennsylvania  School  of
Medicine,  Philadelphia,  PA  19104 and  'Mallory  Institute  of  Pathology
Foundation,  Boston  University  School  of  Medicine,  Boston,  MA 02118,
USA
In the present study, we examined the ability of chymostatin,
a  highly  specific  inhibitor  of  chymotrypsin,  to  suppress
dimethylhydrazine-induced  colon  carcinogenesis,  and  the
dose-response  relationship  for  an  extract  of  soybeans
containing  the  Bowman -Birk  inhibitor  (BBI)  to  suppress
dimethylhydrazine-induced  colon carcinogenesis, when added
to  the  diet  of  mice.  Our  results  showed  that:  (i)  diets
containing  0.1%  BBI  reduced  the  incidence  of  adeno-
carcinomas  of  the  colon  - 5 0 %,  but  had  no  effect  on  the
incidence  of  squamous  cell  carcinomas  of  the  anal  gland;
(ii) the suppressive effect  requires protease inhibitor  activity,
as the autoclaved BBI, in which all protease inhibitory activity
has  been  destroyed,  was  ineffective  at  suppressing  the
incidence  of  adenocarcinomas;  (iii) chymostatin  suppressed
the incidence of squamous cell carcinomas of the anal  gland,
but  not  adenocarcinomas  of  the  colon;  and  (iv) the  growth
rates of the animals were the same in each of the experimental
groups. Our  results indicate that the levels of anticarcinogenic
protease  inhibitors  present  in  the  diets  of  these  animals  do
not have any adverse effects  on the growth or  general  health
of  the  animals.

Introduction
Cancer  of the colon  and  rectum  is the second  leading  cause of
cancer death  in US adults (1).  In the United  States,  ~  130 000
new cases of colon cancer are reported each year and colon cancer
accounts  for  about  60 000 deaths  annually.  The  incidence  and
mortality rates of colon cancer have remained unchanged for the
last 50 years (1,2). Since colon cancer has been largely  refractory
to contemporary treatment regimens (2), an alternative approach
to  controlling  this  disease  is  through  prevention.  Cancer
prevention via dietary means may well be the most  cost-effective
approach  towards  controlling  this  disease.

Epidemiological  data  suggest  that  nutritional  factors  play  a
major role in the etiology of cancer at many different  sites (3-7).
For example, high dietary levels of legumes have been associated
with low cancer rates in general and are inversely correlated with
the  incidences  of  breast,  colon  and  prostate  cancer  (3,6,7).
Legumes are  known  to contain  high concentrations  of  protease
inhibitors (8), as well as other agents (such as lectins, etc.) which
may  modify  carcinogenesis.  Protease  inhibitors  have  been
shown  to  have  anticarcinogenic  activity  in  vivo  and  in  vitro
(e.g.  9-22).  We  have  reported  that  the  soybean-derived
Bowman-Birk  inhibitor  (BBI*)  (8,23)  suppresses  dimethyl-
hydrazine (DMH)-induced colon and liver carcinogenesis in mice,
when  present  in  the diet  (17,20),  7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthra-

*Abbreviations:  BBI,  Bowman —Birk  inhibitor;  DMH,  dimethylhydrazine;
ABBI, autoclaved  BBI;  SBBI,  succinylated  BBI.

©  Oxford  University  Press

cene-induced  cheek  pouch  carcinogenesis  in  hamsters,  when
topically  applied  (16),  and  3-methylcholanthrene-induced  lung
tumorigenesis in mice (21). BBI has also been shown to suppress
carcinogen-induced  malignant  transformation  in  vitro (9,22).

In general,  inhibitors of chymotrypsin  have been  found  to be
the  most  effective  suppressors  of  transformation  in  vitro (15).
For example, nanomolar concentrations of chymostatin, a highly
specific  inhibitor  of  chymotrypsin  (24),  have  been  shown  to
inhibit  radiation-induced  transformation  of  C3H/10T1/2  cells
(14,15).  In  the  current  experiments,  we  have  continued  our
studies  examining  the  ability  of  the  BBI  to  suppress  colon
carcinogenesis and have also examined the effect  of chymostatin
on  colon  carcinogenesis.

Materials  and  methods
Chemicals
The  BBI was obtained  from  Central  Soya  (Fort Wayne,  IN) and  was prepared
as  described  (17).  Chymostatin  was  obtained  from  the  US/Japan  Cooperative
Cancer Research Program.  1,2-Dimethylhydrazine  dihydrochloride was obtained
from  Aldrich.  Stock  solutions of DMH were freshly  prepared  in  1  mM  EDTA
and  adjusted  to  pH  6.5  with  NaOH  before  each  set  of  injections.
Preparation of autoclaved  BBI  (ABBI) and  succinylated BBI (SBBI)
ABBI was prepared by autoclaving  BBI for  30 min.  SBBI was prepared  by the
method of Smirnoff  (25). Briefly,  BBI was dissolved  in distilled water (5 mg/ml)
and brought to pH 9 by the addition of  1  N NaOH. Succinic anhydride was added
(in a ratio of 0.5 g succinic anhydride/g BBI), the sample was stirred and maintained
at pH 8 -9  by the dropwise addition of  1  N NaOH. After 2 h, additional succinic
anhydride was added  and the reaction  was allowed  to proceed  for  an additional
2 h.  Next, the pH was adjusted  to 3.5  by the addition  of concentrated  HC1, the
sample was centrifuged  (10 000 g  x  30 min, 4°C), and the pellet was resuspended
in distilled water, dialyzed against distilled  water (three changes, overnight) and
lyophilized to dryness. The modified  (succinylated) BBI was assayed for its ability
to inhibit chymotrypsin and trypsin; chymotrypsin  inhibitory activity was present
while  >99%  of  the  trypsin  inhibitory  activity  of  BBI  was  lost.
Animals
Eight  week  old  male  CD-I  mice  were  obtained  from  Charles  River  Breeding
Laboratories (Wilmington, MA), and upon arrival in the laboratory were randomly
assorted  into treatment  groups,  housed  three  mice  per  cage  and  placed  on  the
experimental  diets.  The  animals  were  maintained  in  a  controlled  environment
animal facility at 25°C with a  12 h light/dark cycle, and received  food and water
ad  libitum. The  mice  were  fed  a  modification  of diet  no.  101  from  Bio  Serve
(Frenchtown, NJ), a methionine-supplemented  diet based on guidelines from the
American Institute of Nutrition for a purified diet for rats and mice (26). Animals
receiving  protease  inhibitor  supplements  also  received  diet  no.  101  with  20%
dietary protein, with the protease inhibitor supplement replacing various percentages
of the casein component of the diet. All animals were weighed at weekly intervals
and received  weekly  i.p.  injections  of  DMH. The DMH  injections began when
the mice were  10 weeks old, after  a 2 week adaptation to the experimental diets
and continued for 20 weeks. The animals were killed by cervical extension.  For
histopathological  analysis, any macroscopically  abnormal organs, as well as the
colon and pancreas, were removed from each mouse. The pancreas was weighed
and examined  for  grossly  observable tumors or other abnormalities.  The entire
colon  was examined  and  the  distance  between  the  anus  and  any  visible  tumor
was measured. The section of the colon containing the tumor was then excised.
In addition  to the abnormal  sections of the colon,  normal  appearing areas  from
each of the three major regions (representing the entire length of the colon) were
taken from each mouse for histopathologic analysis. These sections, the tumors,
pancreata  and  any  macroscopically  abnormal  tissues  were  preserved  in  10%
buffered  formalin and embedded in paraffin;  4 -5  /an thick sections were prepared
and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Benign and malignant colon tumors were
classified  as  described  (27).  Pathological  analysis  was  performed  without
knowledge  of  the  treatment  group  to  which  the  animals  belonged.

1083

P.C.Billings,  P.M.Newberne  and  A.R.Kennedy

Table  I.  Effects  of  various  protease

inhibitor  preparations

on  colon  carcinogenesis  (adenomatous

tumors)

Treatment  groupa

No.  and  types  of
Benign

tumors

Malignant

1.  DMH
2.  DMH  +  ABBI  (0.1%)
3.  DMH  +  BBI  (0.1%)
4.  DMH  +  BBI  (0.01%)

5.  DMH  +  BBI  (0.0005%)
6.  DMH  +  SBBI  (0.1%)

1  adenoma
1  adenoma
3  adenomas
3  adenomas

none
6  adenomas

7.  DMH  +  chymostatin  (0.1%)

2  adenomas

12 polyploid  adenocarcinomas
10 polyploid  adenocarcinomas
8  polyploid  adenocarcinomas
8  polyploid  adenocarcinomas

10 polyploid  adenocarcinomas
10 polyploid  adenocarcinomas
1  adenocarcinoma
9  polyploid  adenocarcinomas

Other  pathologyb

2  muc.  hyp.
1  muc.  hyp.
4  muc.  hyp.
2  muc.  hyp.
3 dys.  hyp.
3  muc.  hyp.
1  muc.  hyp.

No.  of  animals  with
no.  of  animals
Benignc

tumors/total

Malignant

(5.3%)
(6.3%)

1/19 
1/16 
3/23  (13%)
3/18  (17%)

0/15
5/21  (24%)

12/19  (63%)
10/16  (62%)
8/23  (35%)
8/18  (44%)

10/15  (67%)
11/21  (52%)

1  muc.  hyp.

2/17  (12%)

9/17  (53%)

aGroups  1,  2,  4,  5  and  7  contained  20  animals/group;  groups  3 and  6  contained  23  animals/group.
Other  pathology:  muc.  hyp.,  mucosal  hyperplasia,  dys.  hyp.,  dysplastic  hyperplasia.
'Statistical  analysis  (chi-squared)  for  benign  tumors:  groups  1 versus  2 - 7,  P  >  0.05.
dStatistical  analysis  (chi-squared)  for  malignant  tumors:  groups  1 versus  2,  P  >  0.05;  groups  1 versus  3,  P  <  0.05;  groups  1 versus  4 - 7,  P  > 0.05.

Results
The  current  studies  were designed  to determine  the ability  and
dose—response  relationship  of  various  preparations  of  BBI to
suppress DMH-induced colon carcinogenesis in mice. A second
objective of the study was to determine whether chymostatin has
the ability to suppress colon carcinogenesis. The mice were given
DMH  injections  while maintained  on diets containing:  (i) 0.1%
(1 part per  1000), 0.01 % (0.1 part per  1000) or 0.0005% (0.005
part  per  1000) of the BBI extract;  (ii) chymostatin,  a low  mol.
wt chymotrypsin  inhibitor  (24); and  (iii)  modified  preparations
containing  ABBI  (autoclaving  destroys  all  chymotrypsin  and
trypsin inhibitory activity) or SBBI [this BBI preparation has been
treated  with succinic anhydride, which  specifically  succinylates
a critical  lysine residue (Lysl6)  in the trypsin inhibitory portion
of  the  BBI  molecule.  This  covalent  modification  selectively
removes the trypsin inhibitory activity, leaving the chymotrypsin
inhibitory  activity  intact  (17,25)].  The  experimental  group
receiving  ABBI  also served  as an  isocaloric  diet  control  group
for the treatment groups receiving the various BBI preparations.
In  the  first  series  of  experiments,  DMH-induced  adeno-
carcinomas  in  the  colon  in  63%  of  the  animals;  0.1% BBI in
the  diet  significantly  reduced  the  incidence  of  these  tumors  in
the  DMH-treated  animals to 34.8%  (Table I). At 0.01 % of the
diet, BBI produced an insignificant  decrease in tumor incidence,
while dietary  levels of 0.0005%  BBI, 0.1 % ABBI, 0.1 % SBBI
or  0.1 % chymostatin  had  no  effect  on  the  induction  of adeno-
carcinomas  (Table  I).

Interestingly,  a  different  pattern  of  tumor  suppression  was
observed  when  we  compared  the  incidence  of  squamous  cell
carcinomas  of the anal gland  in animals  fed  the different  diets.
The BBI had no effect  on the incidence of anal  gland tumors in
these animals,  while  a suppressive  effect  on  these tumors was
observed  with a diet supplemented  with chymostatin  (Table II).
We performed  two additional  sets of experiments  to determine
the  effects  of  chymostatin  on  gastro-intestinal  tract  tumors.  In
these  studies,  DMH  injections  (15  mg/kg  in  experiment  1 and
20 mg/kg in experiment 2) were given for 20 weeks; the animals
were killed 6 months after the beginning of carcinogen  injections.
As two different  experiments  were performed  to determine the
effect  of chymostatin  on colon  carcinogenesis,  we analyzed out
data using the likelihood ratio chi-squared test (GLIM Statistical
Package,  Royal  Statistical  Society)  to  rule  out  the  effect  of
experimental  variation.  Using this analysis, we found  that there

1084

Table  II.  Effects  of  various  protease  inhibitor  preparations  on  anal  gland
carcinogenesis3

Treatment

group

1.
2.

DMH
DMH

+  ABBI  (0.1 %)

3.
4.
5.

DMH
DMH
DMH

+  BBI  (0.1 %)
+  BBI  (0.01%)
+  BBI  (0.0005%)

Animals  bearing
malignant  tumors
of  the anal
glandb/total  no.
of  animals  in
treatment  group

7/19  (37%)
5/16  (31%)

8/23  (35%)
8/18  (44%)
6/15  (40%)

6.

DMH

+  SBBI  (0.1%)

11/21  (52%)

7.

DMH

+  chymostatin  (0.1%)

3/17  (18%)

Other

pathology0

met.
5sq.
2sq.
met.
1 abscess
met.
3sq.
2  dys
•  hyp.
met.
4  sq.
1  sq.
hyp-
1  sq.
hyp.
1  hyperkeratosis
carcinoma

aStatistical  analysis  (chi-squared):  groups  1 versus  2 — 7,  P  >  0.05.
bAll  malignant  tumors  of  the  anal  gland  were  squamous  cell  carcinomas;  no
benign  tumors  were  observed.
cOther  pathology:  sq.  met.,  squamous  metaplasia;  sq.  hyp.,  squamous
hyperplasia;  dys.  hyp.,  dysplastic  hyperplasia.  No  other  tumors  were
observed.

were no significant differences  between the experiments. Further,
these  studies  demonstrate  that  chymostatin  had  a  significant
suppressive effect  on DMH-induced  squamous cell  carcinomas
of  the  anal  gland  but  had  no effect  on  adenomatous  tumors of
the  colon  (Table  IH).

It has been  reported  that high  levels of protease  inhibitors in
the diet can lead to reduced growth rates, resulting from decreased
protein utilization, as well as pathologic changes in the pancreas
(28-30).  Consequently,  the  animals  were  weighed  at  weekly
intervals to assess their rate of growth; no difference  in the growth
rates for animals in any of the experimental groups was observed.
The  pancreata  from  the  animals  in each  group  were  dissected
out and weighed. No difference  in the ratio of pancreas wt/body
wt was observed between those animals on the control diet and
those receiving diets containing protease  inhibitor.  Further,  the
protease  inhibitor-containing  diets  had  no  effect  on  the  gross
appearance  or  histopathological  characteristics  of  the  pancreas
in  these  studies.

Protease  inhibitor  suppression  of  colon  and  anal  gland  carcinogenesis

Table  III.  Effects  of  chymostatin  on

the  induction

of  gastrointestinal

tract  carcinogenesis

(colon  and  anal  gland)

Treatment  group

Exp.
no.a

Total  no. of
adenomatous
colon  tumors

Total  no.  of
squamous  anal
tumors

Fraction  of  mice  with
adenomatous  tumors
(adenomas  and
adenocarcinomas)
of  the  colonb

Fraction  of  mice
bearing  anal  tumors
(squamous  cell
carcinomas)
per  experiment

Totalc

,d

1.  DMH

2.  DMH  +  chymostatin  (0.1%)

1
2
1
2

6
42
5
34

6
15
3
7

5/15  (33%)
22/37  (60%)
5/15  (33%)
18/36  (50%)

5/15  (33%)
15/37  (41%)
3/15  (20%)
7/36  (19%)

20/52

(39%)

10/51

(20%)

aExperiment  1 contained  15 animals/treatment  group;  experiment  2 contained  38  animals/treatment  group.
bNo  significant  difference  was  observed  between  the  number  of  colon  tumors  in  the  DMH  and  DMH  +  chymostatin  groups;  likelihood  ratio  chi-squared  test:
groups  1 versus  2  (P  =  0.48).
CA  significant  difference  was  observed  between  the  number  of  anal  tumors  in  the  DMH  and  DMH  +  chymostatin  groups;  likelihood  ratio  chi-squared  test:
groups  1 versus  2  (P  =  0.03).
In  the  DMH  treatment  group  two  ear  canal  tumors  were  observed;  no  other  tumors  were  observed  besides  those  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract.

Discussion

In the present  study,  we have utilized  the DMH-induced  colon
carcinogenesis  model  to  study  the  inhibition  of  colon  carcino-
genesis in mice by dietary protesae inhibitors. Our results support
our  previous  findings  that  dietary  intake  of  BBI  will  suppress
adenomatous tumors of the colon (17,20). BBI was an  effective
anticarcinogenic agent when present at a concentration of 0.1 %,
while  lower  concentrations  of  the  inhibitor  were  less  effective
or ineffective  at reducing tumor  incidence. Consequently, these
studies, in addition to previous work (17), suggest that the 0.1 %
level  of the BBI extract  is the minimal  concentration  necessary
for a significant  reduction  in adenomatous tumors of the colon.
Lower  levels  of  dietary  BBI  are  still  effective  at  suppressing
tumors  at  other  sites;  however,  at  0.01% of  the diet,  the BBI
extract has been shown to suppress DMH-induced angiosarcomas
of the liver  (17).  It  should  be  noted  that  the levels  of  protease
inhibitors shown to be anticarcinogenic in our studies are roughly
comparable (on a mg/kg basis) to the estimated intake of protease
inhibitors  by  specific  human  populations  consuming  relatively
high  levels of dietary  protease  inhibitors,  such as the Japanese
and Seventh Day Adventists (17). These populations have been
shown to have lower than normal incidences of breast, colon and
prostate cancer (3-7);  it is possible that the low cancer incidence
in these populations could be, at least in part, attributable to their
dietary  intake  of  anticarcinogenic  protease  inhibitors.

The  inability  of  ABBI  to  suppress  the  formation  of  adeno-
carcinomas  provides  strong  evidence  that  protease  inhibitory
activity  is necessary  for  tumor  suppression.  We  also  observed
that SBBI had no effect  on colon carcinogenesis in these studies.
SBBI contains chymotrypsin  inhibitory  activity  but has had the
trypsin inhibitory activity of BBI selectively removed. A number
of different  explanations  are possible  for  our  results showing a
lack of suppression  of carcinogenesis by SBBI. Although  SBBI
still  retains the ability  to suppress  transformation  in vitro, it is
not known whether it has the same ability as BBI to pass through
the stomach  in an  intact  form  and  enter  the intestine  in a  form
capable of interacting  with proteases.  Even  if SBBI does reach
the intestine as an active protease  inhibitor,  it may not be taken
up by the colonic epithelial cells as efficiently  as BBI and, thus,
may not be able to interact with, and inhibit, the critical enzymes
in these  cells.  Additionally,  SBBI  may  be  more  water  soluble
than  the  native  inhibitor  and,  hence,  may  be  more  rapidly
excreted. Alternatively, the trypsin inhibitory portion of BBI may
play an important role in inhibiting adenomatous colonic tumors.

in  vitro  by 

tumor  promoters 

We  have  observed  previously  that  SBTI  (a  strong  inhibitor  of
trypsin)  does  not  directly  suppress  radiation  transformation  in
vitro,  but  will  suppress  the  enhancement  of  radiation-induced
transformation 
(12,13).
Consequently, while chymotrypsin inhibitors are likely to be the
most potent anticarcinogenic  agents, trypsin  inhibitors,  such as
SBTI,  may  also  have  cancer  chemopreventive  value  by  virtue
of their ability to inhibit the promotional phase of carcinogenesis.
Thus,  tumor  promotion  may  play  an  important  role  in  the
development of adenomatous tumors arising in the large bowel.
While  BBI  suppressed  the  incidence  of  adenocarcinomas  of
the colon, it did not affect  the incidence of anal gland squamous
cell  tumors.  In contrast,  chymostatin  suppressed  the  incidence
of squamous cell tumors in the anal gland, but had no effect  on
adenocarcinomas of the colon. Several factors could account for
these  results,  (i)  The  critical  target  enzymes  involved  in  the
malignant transformation  of the cells of the colon and anal gland
are  different.  Presumably,  BBI  would  be  a  more  effective
inhibitor  of  the  critical  target  enzymes  in  the  colon  while
chymostatin  is more effective  at inhibiting these enzymes in the
cells  lining  the  anal  gland,  (ii)  BBI  may  be  absorbed  more
efficiently  by the epithelial cells lining the colon while chymostatin
may  be more  effectively  absorbed  by the epithelial  cells  lining
the anal gland.  While BBI is water  soluble, chymostatin  is not,
and hence its distribution in the gastrointestinal tract contents may
not favor uptake by the critical epithelial cells lining the gut. The
fact that chymostatin is fat soluble could also explain its selective
ability to affect  anal gland carcinogenesis.  Consequently,  water
solubility may be an important characteristic of protease inhibitors
for  the  suppression  of  adenomatous  tumors  of  the  colon.

It  is  somewhat  surprising  to  us  that  BBI  does  not  affect
squamous cell carcinomas of the anal gland, as it has previously
been shown to suppress squamous cell carcinomas of the hamster
cheek pouch (16). As discussed elsewhere (17), the cells of origin
of  squamous cell carcinomas are markedly  different  in the oral
and  anal  gland  epithelium,  which  perhaps  accounts  for  the
observed differences  in the ability of BBI to affect  carcinogenesis
at  these  two  sites.

The  ability  of  protease  inhibitors  to  suppress  carcinogenesis
appears to vary greatly with the dose of carcinogen  administered.
BBI  has  previously  been  shown 
to  prevent  completely
adenomatous tumors of the gastrointestinal tract when the doses
of DMH utilized were such that a considerably  lower percentage
of  the  animals  developed  tumors  than  observed  in  the  present
study (17,20). We observed that BBI was capable of suppressing

1085

17. St Clair.W.H.,  Billings.P.C,  Carew.J.A.,  Keller-McGandy,C,  Newbeme.P.
and  Kennedy,A.R. 
(1990)  Suppression  of  dimethylhydrazine-induced
carcinogenesis  in  mice  by  dietary  addition  of  the  Bowman-Birk  protease
inhibitor.  Cancer Res.,  50,  580-586.

18. Troll.W.  and Kennedy,A.R.  (1989)  Workshop  report  from  the  Division of
Cancer  Etiology,  National  Cancer  Institute,  National  Institutes  of  Health.
Protease  inhibitors  as  cancer  chemopreventive  agents.  Cancer Res.,  49,
499-502.

19. Troll,W.,  Klassen,A.  and  Janoff.A.  (1970)  Tumorigenesis  in  mouse  skin:
inhibition  by  synthetic  inhibitors  of  proteases.  Science,  169,  1211-1213.
20. Weed.H.,  McGandy,R.B.  and  Kennedy.A.R.  (1985)  Protection  against
dimethylhydrazine-induced  adenomatous  tumors of the mouse colon  by the
dietary addition of an extract of soybeans containing the Bowman-Birk  pro-
tease  inhibitor.  Carcinogenesis, 6,  1239—1241.

21. Witschi.H.  and  Kennedy.A.R.  (1989)  Modulation  of  lung  tumor  develop-
ment  in  mice  with  the  soybean-derived  Bowman-Birk  protease  inhibitor.
Carcinogenesis, 10,  2275-2277.

22. YavelowJ., Collins.M., Birk,Y., Troll,W. and Kennedy.A.R.  (1985) Nanomolar
inhibitor  suppress
in  vitro.  Proc.  Nail.  Acad.  Sci.  USA,

concentrations  of  Bowman-Birk  soybean  protease 
x-ray  induced  transformation 
82, 5395-5399.

23. Birk,Y.  (1985) The  Bowman-Birk  inhibitor.  Int. J.  Peptide Protein Res.,

25,  113-131.

24. Umezawa.H. (1976) Structures and activities of protease inhibitors of microbial

origin.  Methods Enzymol.,  45,  678-695.

25. Smirnoff.P.,  Khalef.S.,  Birk,Y.  and  Applebaum.S.W.  (1979) Trypsin  and
chymotrypsin  inhibitor  from  chick  peas.  Int.  J.  Peptide Protein Res.,  12,
186-192.

26. Nutrient  Requirements  of  Domestic  Animals,  No.  10  (1978)  Nutrient
Requirements of Laboratory  Animals.  National  Research  Council,  National
Academy  of  Sciences,  Washington  DC.

27. Nauss.K.M.,  Locniskar.M.F.,  Pavilina.T.  and  Newberne.P.M.  (1984)
Morphology and distribution of 1,2-dimethylhydrazine  dihydrochloride-induced
colon tumors and their  relationship  to gut-associated  lymphoid  tissue in the
rat.  J.  Natl.  Cancer Inst.,  73,  915-924.

28. McGuinness.E.E., Morgan.R.G.H., Levison.D.A., Frape,D.L., Hopwood.D.
and Wormsley.K.G.  (1980) The effects  of  long  term  feeding  of soya  flour
on  the  rat  pancreas.  Scand. J.  Gastroenterol.,  15,  497-502.

29. Nairn,M.,  Gertler.A.  and  Birk.Y.  (1981)  The  effect  of  dietary  raw  and
autoclaved soyabean protein  fractions  on growth, pancreatic enlargement and
pancreatic enzymes  in  rats.  Br.  J.  Nutr.,  47,  1-8.

30. Flavin,D.F. (1982) The effects  of soybean trypsin  inhibitors on the pancreas

of  animals and  man.  Vet. Hum.  Toxicoi,  2A,  25-28.

31. Lamont.J.T.  and  O'Gorman.T.A.  (1978)  Experimental  colon  cancer.

Gastroenterology, 75,  1157-1169.

Received on  October 12, 1989; revised on March 29,  1990;  accepted on April
19, 1990

P.C.Billings,  P.M.Newberne  and  A.R.Kennedy

the yield of tumors, in terms of tumor-bearing animals, by  —1/2
in this study,  which  utilized a high carcinogen  dose resulting in
gastrointestinal tract tumors in most of the DMH-treated animals.
Chemopreventive  agents  appear  to act  similarly  in other  organ
systems as well, with the degree of suppression of tumorigenici-
ty  being  inversely  correlated  with  the  tumor  yield  (15).

The results from  this study support our previous findings  that
non-toxic levels of BBI can suppress the development of murine
adenomatous colon tumors, which are histopathologically  similar
to those  that  occur  in  the  most  common  form  of  human  colon
cancer.  Indeed,  the  colon  cancer  model  utilized  in the  present
studies is considered to be a representative model  for the human
disease  (31).  Thus,  BBI  may  have  the  potential  to  lower  the
incidence  of  colon  cancer  in  the  human  population.

Acknowledgements
We  thank  Eric  Glasgow,  Christine  Keller-McGandy  and  Harrison  Weed  for
technical assistance  in these studies.  We also thank  Dr Jesse Berlin  for  his help
with statistical analysis, Dr Robert McGandy for his help with the histopathological
analysis  of the data  shown  in Table  III and  Dr  Walter  Troll  and  the  US Japan
Cooperative Cancer Research Program for providing the chymostatin used in this
study.  This  research  was supported  by  NIH  grants CA 46496 and  CA  38246.

References
1. Bresalier.R.S., Boland.C.R., Sack.T.L. and Kim,Y.M. (1986) Cancer of the

gastrointestinal tract. In Kem,F. Jr and Blum.A.L. (eds), The Gastroenterology
Annual/3.  Elsevier,  Amsterdam,  pp.  413-469.

2. Cairns,J. (1985) The treatment of diseases and the war against cancer. Scient.

Am.,  253,  51-59.

3. Correa,P.  (1981)  Epidemiologic  correlations  between  diet  and  cancer

frequency.  Cancer Res.,  41,  3685-3690.

4. Doll,R.  and  Peto.R.  (1981) The causes of cancer:  quantitative  estimates of
avoidable  risks  of cancer  in the  United  States today. J.  Natl.  Cancer Inst.,
66,  1193-1308.

5. Committee on Diet, Nutrition and Cancer (1982) Diet, Nutrition and Cancer.
Assembly  of  Life  Sciences,  National  Research  Council,  National  Academy
of  Sciences,  Washington,  DC.

6. Mills.P.K., Beeson.W.L., Abbey.D.E., Fraser.G.E. and Phillips.R.L. (1988)
Dietary  habits  and  past  medical  history  as  related  to  fatal  pancreas  cancer
risk  among  Adventists.  Cancer, 61,  2578-2585.

7. Phillips,R.L.  (1975) Role of lifestyle and dietary habits in risk of cancer among

Seventh  Day  Adventists.  Cancer Res.,  35,  3513-3522.

8. Birk,Y. (1976) Proteinase  inhibitors from  plant sources. Methods Enzymol.,

45,  695-751.

9. Baturay.N.Z. and Kennedy,A.R.  (1986) Pyrene acts as a cocarcinogen  with
the carcinogens benzo(a)pyrene, 0-propiolactone and radiation in the induction
of  malignant  transformation  of cultured  mouse  fibroblasts;  soybean  extract
containing the Bowman-Birk  inhibitor acts as an anticarcinogen. Cell. Biol.
Toxicoi,  2,  21-32.

10. Billings,P.C, St Clair,W.,  Ryan.C.A. and Kennedy,A.R.  (1987) Inhibition
of  radiation-induced  transformation  of  C3H/10T1/2  cells  by  chymotrypsin
inhibitor  1 from  potatoes.  Carcinogenesis, 8,  809 — 812.

ll.Corasanti.J.G.,  Hobika.G.H.  and  Markus.G.  (1982)  Interference  with
dimethylhydrazine  induction of colon tumors in mice by e-aminocaproic acid.
Science,  216,  1020-1021.

12. Kennedy,A.R.  (1984)  Prevention  of  radiation  transformation  in  vitro.  In
Prasad.K.N.  (ed.),  Vitamins,  Nutrition  and  Cancer.  Karger,  Basel,
pp.  166-179.

13. Kennedy,A.R.  (1984)  Promotion  and  other  interactions  between  agents  in
the  induction  of  transformation  in  vitro in  fibroblasts.  In  Slaga.T.J.  (ed.),
Mechanisms  of  Tumor  Promotion,  Vol.  Ill:  Tumor  Promotion  and
Carcinogenesis In Vitro.  CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, Chapter 2, pp.  13 - 5 5.

14. Kennedy,A.R.  (1985)  The  conditions  for  the  modification  of  radiation
transformation  in  vitro  by  a  tumor  promoter  and  protease  inhibitors.
Carcinogenesis,  6,  1441 — 1446.

15. Kennedy,A.R.  and  Billings,P.C. (1987) Anticarcinogenic actions of protease
inhibitors. In Cerutti.P.A.,  Nygaard,F.O. and Simic,M.G. (eds), Anticarcino-
genesis and Radiation Protection. Plenum Press, New York, pp.  285-295.
16. Messadi.D.V.,  Billings,P.,  Shklar.G.  and  Kennedy,A.R.  (1986)  Inhibition
of  oral  carcinogenesis  by  a  protease  inhibitor.  J.  Natl.  Cancer Inst.,  76,
447-452.

1086

Nutrient Interactions and Toxicity—Research Communication

Soybean Isoﬂavones Reduce
Experimental Metastasis in Mice1,2

Manuscript received 5 November 1998. Initial review complete 11
December 1998. Revision accepted 1 February 1999.

Donghua Li, John A. Yee, Michael H. McGuire,*
Patricia A. Murphy† and Lin Yan3
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University School
of Medicine, Omaha, NE 68178, *Department of Surgery,
Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE 68131 and
†Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011

ABSTRACT We investigated the effect of dietary supple-
mentation with isoﬂavones on pulmonary metastasis of
B16BL6 murine melanoma cells in C57BL/6 mice. Mice were
fed a basal AIN-93G diet or the basal diet supplemented with
the isoﬂavones genistein and daidzein at 113 ␮mol/kg, 225
␮mol/kg, 450 ␮mol/kg, or 900 ␮mol/kg for 2 wk before and
after the intravenous injection of 0.5 x 105 melanoma cells. At
necropsy, the number and size of tumors that formed in the
lungs were determined. The number of mice that had >15
lung tumors was 17 in the control group, and 16, 15, 13, and 10
in the groups fed isoﬂavones at 113 ␮mol/kg, 225 ␮mol/kg,
450 ␮mol/kg and 900 ␮mol/kg, respectively. The latter two
were signiﬁcantly different from the control (P ≤ 0.05). The
median number of tumors in the control group was 67, and
those in the isoﬂavone-supplemented groups were 57, 33, 32,
and 17, respectively. The last was signiﬁcantly different from
the control (P ≤ 0.05). Dietary supplementation with isoﬂa-
vones at 225 ␮mol/kg, 450 ␮mol/kg, and 900 ␮mol/kg also
signiﬁcantly decreased tumor size (median cross-sectional
area and volume) compared to the control values. We con-
clude that dietary supplementation with isoﬂavones reduces
experimental metastasis of melanoma cells in mice. J. Nutr.
129: 1075–1078, 1999.

KEY WORDS:
● metastasis

● mice ● genistein ● daidzein ● melanoma

Epidemiologic studies suggest that consumption of foods that
are high in soybean-based products is associated with a reduced
risk of breast (Lee et al. 1991), prostate (Severson et al. 1989),
uterine (Goodman et al. 1997), and gastric cancers (Nagai et al.
1982) in humans. Dietary supplementation with soybean protein
isolate (SPI)4 (Hawrylewicz et al. 1991) or soybean chips (Barnes
et al. 1990) reduces mammary carcinogenesis in female rats.
Adding autoclaved raw soybean to the diet of male mice inhibits
carcinogenicity of N-nitroso compounds in the liver and urinary

1 Presented in part at Experimental Biology 98, April 21, 1998, San Francisco,
CA. [Yan, L., Yee, J. A., Li, D. & McGuire, M. H. (1998) Effect of dietary supple-
mentation of isoﬂavones on pulmonary metastasis of melanoma cells in mice.
FASEB J. 12: A829 (abs.)].

2 This work was supported by the State of Nebraska Cancer and Smoking-Related

Disease Research Program (Grant No. 98–51) and by Hazel Berve Trust Fund.

3 To whom correspondence should be addressed.
4 Abbreviations used: SPI, soybean protein isolate.

bladder (Mokhtar et al. 1988). These protective effects are asso-
ciated with soy isoﬂavones, e.g. genistein and daidzein. Long-term
intraperitoneal administration of genistein and daidzein to young
rats (Constantinou et al. 1996) and subcutaneous injection of
genistein to neonatal rats (Lamartiniere et al. 1995) reduce the
development of mammary carcinoma after exposure of the ani-
mals to carcinogens. Other studies showed that soy-derived prod-
ucts have no effect on tumorigenesis in some animal models
(Reddy et al. 1976).

Soybean is a rich source of dietary isoﬂavones (Murphy 1982).
Isoﬂavones exist in soybean primarily as conjugated glycosides.
Following ingestion, they are hydrolyzed to aglycones by glycosi-
dases produced by intestinal bacteria. The conjugates genistin,
daidzin, and glycitin and their aglycones, genistein, daidzein, and
glycitein constitute 90–95% of the total soy isoﬂavones (Murphy
1982). It appears that the unconjugated aglycones are associated
with many biological properties of isoﬂavones that may be re-
sponsible for their anticancer activities. These include antiestro-
genic activity (Folman and Pope 1966), inhibition of protein
tyrosine kinases (Akiyama et al. 1987), regulation of cell cycle
progression and apoptosis (Kroemer et al. 1995), and antiangio-
genic activity (Fotsis et al. 1993).

Metastasis, the spread of malignant cells from a primary neo-
plasm to distant organs that results in the development of sec-
ondary tumors, is the most devastating aspect of cancer. Ad-
vances in surgical techniques and adjuvant therapies have proven
useful in the treatment of primary tumors. However, metastasis
remains a major cause of poor prognosis and death in cancer
patients. We recently reported that dietary supplementation with
SPI reduces pulmonary metastasis of murine melanoma cells in
mice (Yan et al. 1997). Connolly et al. (1997) reported that
soybean chips inhibit metastasis of human mammary carcinoma
cells in athymic nude mice. These studies suggest that dietary
soybean is useful in preventing the spread of malignant cells.

The objective of the present study was to determine whether
isoﬂavones present in SPI reduce metastasis. To accomplish this,
the effect of dietary supplementation with isoﬂavones genistein
and daidzein on pulmonary metastasis of melanoma cells was
investigated using an intravenous injection model.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals and diets. The protocol of the present study was re-
viewed and approved by the Creighton University Animal Care and
Use Committee and complied with the Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals (National Research Council 1985). Three-
week-old male C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Charles River
(Wilmington, MA). Mice were housed ﬁve per box, in wire-topped
plastic boxes, in a pathogen-free room on a 12:12-h light-dark cycle.
The temperature in the room was maintained at 25 ⫾ 1°C. Mice were
given free access to the diet and deionized water and weighed weekly.
Five diets were compared: a basal diet and the basal diet supple-
mented with genistein and daidzein (Lancaster, Windham, NH) at
113, 225, 450, or 900 ␮mol/kg, which was equivalent to that provided
in the diet containing 2.5, 5, 10 or 20% SPI, respectively (Yan et al.
1997). The concentration of genistein in isoﬂavone-supplemented
diets was 83.3, 166.7, 333.3, and 666.7 ␮mol/kg, respectively, and the
concentration of daidzein was 29.5, 59.1, 118.1, and 236.2 ␮mol/kg,
respectively. Glycitein was omitted from the supplementation be-
cause it was not commercially available. Dietary formulations were

0022-3166/99 $3.00 © 1999 American Society for Nutritional Sciences.

1075

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/129/5/1075/4721937
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

1076

LI ET AL.

TABLE 1

Isoﬂavone intake and urinary isoﬂavone excretion in mice fed the control and isoﬂavone-supplemented diets

Urinary Excretion2

Group

Isoﬂavone Intake1

Genistein

Daidzein

Equol

ODMA3

Total Excretion

␮mol/(mouse 䡠 d)

nmol/(mouse 䡠 d)

Control
Isoﬂavones

113 ␮mol/kg
225 ␮mol/kg
450 ␮mol/kg
900 ␮mol/kg

0

0.3
0.6
1.2
2.4

0

3.9
13.3
22.2
51.1

0

14.2
21.3
24.6
44.5

0

0
0
11.7
27.5

0

2.6
2.7
4.7
5.2

0

20.7
37.3
63.3
128.3

1 The isoﬂavone intake was calculated on the basis of dietary isoﬂavone concentrations and the mean food intake of all mice (2.6 ⫾ 0.6 g/d; n ⫽ 30).
2 Urine samples collected from 6 mice in each group during the 1 wk metabolic study before tumor cell injection were pooled and analyzed for

isoﬂavones.

3 O-desmethylangolensin.

based on the AIN-93G standard diet (Reeves et al. 1993), except that
soybean oil was replaced with corn oil. Diet components were pur-
chased from ICN (Costa Mesa, CA). All diets were prepared in our
laboratory, and each lot was stored at 4°C for no longer than 3 wk.
Experimental design. Ninety mice were fed the basal diet for 2 d
before being assigned to ﬁve groups of 18 each. They were then fed
the basal diet or one of the isoﬂavone-supplemented diets. B16BL6
murine melanoma cells (Dr. I. J. Fidler, University of Texas, Houston,
TX) were cultured in minimum essential medium with 10% heat-
inactivated fetal bovine serum as described previously (Yan et al.
1997). The melanoma cells were collected from monolayer cultures
by a brief trypsinization (0.05% trypsin and 0.53 mmol/L EDTA).
The viability of the cells was determined with trypan blue, and a
single cell suspension was made in serum-free medium. After 2 wk
consuming the diets, each mouse was injected via the lateral tail vein
with 0.5 x 105 viable cells in 0.2 mL. To avoid possible changes in cell
viability, melanoma cells were injected into mice within 30 min after
their collection. The order that tumor cells were injected into mice
from different dietary groups was randomized. The mice were then fed
the diets for another 2 wk. One wk before tumor cell injection, six
mice from each group were transferred to metabolic cages, and their
food intake was recorded over 7 d. Urine collected from each group
(n ⫽ 6) throughout this week was pooled and analyzed for isoﬂavones
(Xu et al. 1994). Isoﬂavone intake was calculated on the basis of food
intake and the dietary concentration of isoﬂavones.

At the end of the experiment, mice were anesthetized using
ketamine (50 mg/kg body weight) and xylazine (5 mg/kg body
weight) and then killed by cervical dislocation. Their lungs were
excised and ﬁxed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin. The number
of pulmonary tumors was determined by counting visible black foci by
using a dissecting microscope (Yan et al. 1997). The cross-sectional
area of tumors in randomly selected ﬁelds was measured using a
Quantimet 500 image analysis system (Leica Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK). Tumor volume was calculated using the mean of the longest and
the shortest diameters measured and the assumption that tumors were
spherical (Welch et al. 1983).

Statistical analysis. Fisher’s exact test (Steel and Torrie 1980) was
used to analyze the frequency distribution of the mice that had 1–15
tumors or ⬎15 tumors. Bartlett’s test (Bartlett, 1937) for homogeneity of
variances revealed that standard deviations for the mean values of the
number of tumors, tumor cross-sectional area, and tumor volume differed
signiﬁcantly among the groups (P ⱕ 0.05). Because ANOVA can only
be used to compare the means of populations with homogeneous vari-
ances, the results were analyzed using the Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric
and Dunn’s multiple comparison tests (Kruskal and Wallis 1952). The
data were analyzed using the statistic program Instat 2.01 for Macintosh.
Differences were considered signiﬁcant at P ⱕ 0.05.

intake was recorded. The overall body weight of mice at the
beginning and at the end of the experiment was 14 ⫾ 1 g and
24 ⫾ 1 g, respectively. There was no difference in body weight
among the groups throughout the experiment (data not
shown). The mean food intake of all mice (n ⫽ 30) was 2.6
⫾ 0.6 g/d. There were no differences in food intakes among
the groups (data not shown). The daily isoﬂavone intakes for
each group are shown in Table 1. There were no measurable
isoﬂavones in urine from mice fed the basal diet. The urinary
excretion of isoﬂavones (a sum of genistein, daidzein, and
daidzein metabolites equol and O-desmethylangolensin) was
increased in a dose-dependant manner in mice fed the diet
containing isoﬂavones at 113, 225, 450 or 900 ␮mol/kg (Table
1). One mouse from the control group and one from the 900
␮mol isoﬂavones/kg group were excluded from the experiment
because their growth was signiﬁcantly less than all other mice.
Injection of 0.5 x 105 viable melanoma cells into the lateral
tail vein resulted in lung metastasis in all the mice fed the
control diet (Table 2). Based on the number of lung tumors
per mouse, the mice were placed into one of the two catego-
ries: 1) 1–15 tumors and 2) ⬎15 tumors. In the control group,
all mice had ⬎15 lung tumors (Table 2). By contrast, 89, 83,
72, and 59% of the mice in groups fed the diets containing
isoﬂavones at 113, 225, 450, and 900 ␮mol/kg, respectively,
had ⬎15 tumors. The latter two were signiﬁcantly different
from the control (P ⱕ 0.05). The median number of lung
tumors in the control group was 67. The median number of
lung tumors reduced in the 900 ␮mol/kg isoﬂavone/kg group
compared to the control (P ⱕ 0.05). The mean number of lung
tumors in mice fed the isoﬂavone-supplemented diets de-
creased relative to the control in a dose-dependent manner.
To determine the effect of isoﬂavones on the growth of
metastatic tumors, tumor cross-sectional area and volume were
determined. The median cross-sectional area was 0.55 mm2,
and median volume was 0.21 mm3 in mice fed the basal diet
(Table 3). Dietary supplementation with isoﬂavones decreased
both variables in a dose-dependent manner. The difference in
tumor cross-sectional area and volume between the control
and the groups supplemented with isoﬂavones at 225, 450, or
900 ␮mol/kg was signiﬁcant (P ⱕ 0.01).

DISCUSSION

RESULTS

To determine the effect of dietary supplementation with
isoﬂavones on growth, mice were weighed weekly, and food

We reported that dietary supplementation with SPI reduces
experimental metastasis (Yan et al. 1997). Results of the
present study demonstrate that dietary supplementation with

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/129/5/1075/4721937
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

ISOFLAVONES AND METASTASIS

1077

TABLE 2

Effect of dietary supplementation of isoﬂavones on pulmonary metastasis of melanoma cells in mice

Group

Control
Isoﬂavones

113 ␮mol/kg
225 ␮mol/kg
450 ␮mol/kg
900 ␮mol/kg

n

17

18
18
18
17

Mice with lung tumors

Tumors/mouse

1–15 Tumors

⬎15 Tumors1

Median2

Mean ⫾ SEM3

0

2
3
5
7

17

16
15
13*
10**

67

57
33
32
17*

67 ⫾ 8

71 ⫾ 11
50 ⫾ 12
45 ⫾ 11
29 ⫾ 6

Range

19–110

4–167
5–201
3–157
4–81

1 Signiﬁcantly different from control, *P ⱕ 0.05 and **P ⱕ 0.01. Data were analyzed using Fisher’s exact test.
2 Signiﬁcantly different from the control, *P ⱕ 0.05. Data were analyzed using the Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric and Dunn’s multiple comparison tests.
3 Because of the heterogenous variances among sample populations, the mean values were not compared by ANOVA.

isoﬂavones at concentrations equivalent to that provided in
the SPI diets decreased the number of lung tumors and the
tumor cross-sectional area and volume compared to the con-
trols. The dietary isoﬂavone content was positively correlated
with both the urinary isoﬂavone concentration and the mag-
nitude of the inhibitory effect on metastasis. Dietary supple-
mentation with isoﬂavones up to 900 ␮mol/kg had no adverse
effect on the growth of mice during the experimental period.
These results indicate that isoﬂavones effectively reduced pul-
monary metastasis of melanoma cells and also retarded the
growth of those tumors that developed in the lungs.

The observations from this study provide the ﬁrst evidence
that dietary supplementation with isoﬂavones reduces experimen-
tal metastasis. This is supported by the ﬁndings that oral admin-
istration of genistein inhibits lung metastasis of melanoma cells
intravenously injected into mice (Menon et al. 1998). Interest-
ingly, they found that daidzein was ineffective in reducing me-
tastasis. In the present study, the effect of dietary supplementation
with either genistein or daidzein alone was not tested. However,
the concentration of genistein in the experimental diets was
threefold greater than that of daidzein. Thus, the protective effect
of dietary isoﬂavones on experimental metastasis may be largely
attributed to genistein. Whether daidzein is without an effect is
difﬁcult to conclude from the currently available data. In the
study described by Menon et al. (1998), injection of 1 x 106
melanoma cells into mice led to the development of uncountable
massive lung tumors in control and daidzein-treated animals.
Thus, they were unable to determine whether or not daidzein was
effective in reducing metastasis.

At present, the mechanism whereby dietary soybean or isoﬂa-

vones reduces metastasis remains unknown. The experimental
metastasis model employed in the present study measured the
extravasation of melanoma cells from the cardiovascular system
into the interstitum of the lungs. This requires invasion of the
subendothelial basement membrane. Genistein inhibits the in-
vasion of extracellular matrix by BALB/c mammary carcinoma
cells in vitro (Scholar and Toews 1994). This may be due to an
effect of genistein on cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix.
Genistein is a potent inhibitor of protein tyrosine kinases
(Akiyama et al. 1987). Protein tyrosine kinases phosphorylate
tyrosine residues on proteins that participate in signal transduc-
tion events, including integrin-mediated cell adhesion (Hynes
1992). It was shown that genistein inhibits epithelial growth
factor-stimulated integrin expression by human breast cancer
(Narita et al. 1996) and esophageal cancer cells (Sato et al.
1996). Furthermore, genistein inhibits integrin-mediated cell ad-
hesion by lymphoma cells (Weimar et al. 1997) and arterial
smooth muscle cells (Hedin et al. 1997). These observations
suggest that isoﬂavones could reduce metastasis by affecting cell
adhesion. A second possibility is by reducing protease activity.
Genistein inhibits the secretion of urokinase-type plasminogen
activator and metalloproteinase by LM3 murine mammary tumor
cells (Aguirre Ghiso et al. 1998). These effects were also attrib-
uted to the inhibition of protein tyrosine kinases. It should be
noted that in these studies genistein was used as a pharmacolog-
ical tool to study signal transduction events rather than as a
dietary component. The high concentrations employed are be-
yond the level that is achievable in animals consuming a soy-
containing diet. Thus, exposure of cultured cells to isoﬂavones in
vitro is not comparable to providing animals with soybean- or

TABLE 3

Effect of dietary supplementation of isoﬂavones on tumor cross-sectional area and volume of metastatic tumors that

developed in the lungs of mice

Tumor cross-sectional area, mm2

Tumor volume, mm3

Group

Mice, n

Tumors, n

Median1

Mean ⫾ SEM2

Median1

Mean ⫾ SEM2

Control
Isoﬂavones

113 ␮mol/kg
225 ␮mol/kg
450 ␮mol/kg
900 ␮mol/kg

17

18
18
18
17

139

139
139
139
139

0.55

0.52
0.36**
0.32**
0.16**

0.65 ⫾ 0.03

0.61 ⫾ 0.03
0.49 ⫾ 0.03
0.41 ⫾ 0.03
0.26 ⫾ 0.03

0.21

0.19
0.10**
0.09**
0.03**

0.28 ⫾ 0.02

0.25 ⫾ 0.02
0.19 ⫾ 0.02
0.15 ⫾ 0.01
0.08 ⫾ 0.01

1 Signiﬁcantly different from the control, **P ⱕ 0.01. Data were analyzed using the Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric and Dunn’s multiple comparison tests.
2 Because of the heterogenous variances among sample populations, the mean values were not compared by ANOVA.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/129/5/1075/4721937
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

1078

LI ET AL.

isoﬂavone-supplemented diets. Therefore, caution should be
taken when data from in vitro experiments are used to explain a
dietary effect of soybean or isoﬂavones in animal studies.

The results of the present study demonstrate that tumor cross-
sectional area and volume of mice fed the isoﬂavone diets were
signiﬁcantly reduced compared to those of mice fed the basal diet.
A decrease in tumor size could be due to prolonged retention of
tumor cells in the circulatory system or an inhibition of malignant
cell proliferation after they take up residence in the lungs. Most
circulating B16 melanoma cells rapidly die following their intra-
venous injection (Fidler 1970). Approximately 1% of the cells
survive for 24 h, and one tenth of them form tumor colonies in
the lungs. Therefore, it is unlikely that retention in the circula-
tion explains the difference in tumor size between the control and
the isoﬂavone-supplemented groups. Rather, it is more likely that
this difference is due to the inhibition of mitosis of malignant
cells in the lungs. Investigations in our laboratory designed to
determine the effect of dietary isoﬂavones on cell proliferation
and angiogenesis during the formation of metastatic tumor will
clarify this possibility.

Comparing results of the present study with our previous
report on dietary SPI and experimental metastasis (Yan et al.
1997), it appears that SPI is more effective in reducing the
number of lung tumors than the isoﬂavone-equivalent diets.
Soybean contains several potential anticancer components
other than isoﬂavones, e. g., protease inhibitors (Kennedy
1993) and saponins (Koratkar and Rao 1997). Although these
agents are largely eliminated during the preparation of the SPI,
trace amounts may exist. The SPI also contains phytate that
has been shown to have a tumor-attenuating action in some
animal models (Shamsuddin et al. 1988). Finally, glycitein,
which was present in the SPI employed in our previous study
(Yan et al. 1997), was not supplemented in the diet in the
present study. Thus, these variations could contribute, at least
in part, to the differences observed in these two studies.

In summary, results of the present study demonstrate that
dietary supplementation with isoﬂavones reduced experimen-
tal metastasis of melanoma cells in mice and also inhibited the
growth of metastatic tumors that developed in the lungs. We
conclude that isoﬂavones are responsible, at least in part, for
the protective effect of dietary soybean on experimental me-
tastasis of melanoma cells in mice.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Vivian W. Huang and Mai-Linh Frascarelli,
undergraduate students at Creighton University, for participating in
this research project.

LITERATURE CITED

Aguirre Ghiso, J. A., Farias, E. F., Alonso, D. F. & Bal de Kier Joffe,
E.
(1998) Secretion of urokinase and metalloproteinase-9 induced by stau-
rosporine is dependent on a tyrosine kinase pathway in mammary tumor cells.
Int. J. Cancer 76: 362–367.

Akiyama, T., Ishida, J., Nakagawa, S., Ogawara, H., Watanabe, S., Itoh, N. M.,
(1987) Genistein, a speciﬁc inhibitor of tyrosine-

Shibuya, M. & Fukami, Y.
speciﬁc protein kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 5592–5595.

Barnes, S., Grubbs, C., Setchell, K.D.R. & Carlson, J.

(1990) Soybeans inhibit
mammary tumors in models of breast cancer. In: Mutagens and Carcinogens
in the Diet, (Pariza, M., ed.), pp. 239 –253. Wiley-Liss, New York, NY.

Bartlett, M. S.

(1937) Properties of sufﬁciency and statistical tests. Proc. Roy.

Soc. A160: 268 –282.

Connolly, J. M., Liu, X. H. & Rose, D. P.

(1997) Effects of dietary menhaden oil,
soy, and a cyclooxygenase inhibitor on human breast cancer cell growth and
metastasis in nude mice. Nutr. Cancer 29: 48 –54.

Constantinou, A. I., Mehta, R. G. & Vaughan, A.

Inhibition of N-methyl-
N-nitrosourea-induced mammary tumors in rats by the soybean isoﬂavones.
Anticancer Res. 16: 3293–3298.

(1996)

Fidler, I. J.

(1970) Metastasis: Quantitative analysis of distribution and fate of
tumor emboli labeled with 125I-5-iodo-2⬘-deoxyuridine. J. Natl. Cancer Inst.
45: 773–782.

Folman, Y. & Pope, G. S.

(1966) The interaction in the immature mouse of
potent estrogen with coumesterol, genistein and other utero-vaginotrophic
compounds of lower potency. J. Endocrinol. 34: 215–225.

Fotsis, T., Pepper, M., Adlercreutz, H., Fleischmann, G., Hase, T., Montesano, R.
(1993) Genistein, a dietary-derived inhibitor of in vitro

& Schweigerer, L.
angiogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90: 2690 –2694.

Goodman, M. T., Wilkens, L. R., Hankin, J. H., Lyu, L. C., Wu, A. H. & Kolonel,
(1997) Association of soy and ﬁber consumption with the risk of

L. N.
endometrial cancer. Am. J. Epidemiol. 146: 294 –306.

Hawrylewicz, E. J., Huang, H. H. & Blair, W. H.

(1991) Dietary soybean isolate
and methionine supplementation affect mammary tumor progression in rats.
J. Nutr. 121: 1693–1698.

Hedin, U., Thyberg, J., Roy, J., Dumitrescu, A. & Tran, P. K.

(1997) Role of tyrosine
kinases in extracellular matrix-mediated modulation of arterial smooth muscle
cell phenotype. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 17: 1977–1984.

Hynes, R. O.

(1992)

Integrins: Versatility, modulation, and signaling in cell ad-

hesion. Cell 69: 11–25.

Kennedy, A. R.

(1993) Anticarcinogenic effect of protease inhibitors. In: Pro-
tease Inhibitors as Cancer Chemopreventive Agents, (Troll W. & Kennedy
A. R., eds.), pp. 65–91. Plenum Publishing, New York, NY.

Koratkar, R. & Rao, A. V.

(1997) Effect of soya bean saponins on azoxymeth-
ane-induced preneoplastic lesions in the colon of mice. Nutr. Cancer 27:
206 –209.

Kroemer, G., Petit, P., Zamzami, N., Vayssiere, J. L. & Mignotte, B.

(1995) The

biochemistry of programmed cell death. FASEB J. 9: 1277–1287.

Kruskal, W. H. & Wallis, W. A.

(1952) Use of ranks in one-criterion variance

analysis. J. Am. Statist. Assoc. 47: 583– 621.

Lamartiniere, C. A., Moore, J. B., Brown, N. M., Thompson, R., Hardin, M. J. &
(1995) Genistein suppresses mammary cancer in rats. Carcino-

Barnes, S.
genesis 16: 2833–2840.

Lee, H. P., Gourley, L., Duffy, S. W., Esteve, J. & Day, N. E.

(1991) Dietary

effects on breast cancer risk in Singapore. Lancet 337: 1197–1200.

Menon, L. G., Kuttan, R., Nair, M. G., Chang, Y. C. & Kuttan, G.

(1998) Effect of
isoﬂavones genistein and daidzein in the inhibition of lung metastasis in mice
induced by B16F-10 melanoma cells. Nutr. Cancer 30: 74 –77.

Mokhtar, N. M., El-Asser, A. A., El-Bolkainy, M. N., Ibrahim, H. A., El-din, N. B. &
Moharram, N. Z.
(1988) Effect of soybean feeding on experimental carcino-
genesis-III. Carcinogenicity of nitrite and dibutylamine in mice: A histopatho-
logical study. Eur. J. Cancer Clin. Oncol. 24: 403– 411.

Murphy, P. A.

(1982) Phytoestrogen content of processed soybean products.

Food Technol. 36: 60 – 64.

Nagai, M., Hashimoto, T., Yanagawa, H., Yokoyama, H. & Minowa,
(1982) Relationship of diet to the incidence of esophageal and stomach

M.
cancer in Japan. Nutr. Cancer 3: 257–268.

Narita, T., Kawakami-Kimura, N., Sato, M., Matsuura, N., Higashiguchi, N. &
integrins by heparin-binding EGF-like

Kannagi, R.
growth factor in human breast cancer cells. Oncology 53: 374 –381.

(1996) Alteration of

National Research Council.

(1985) Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals. Publication no. 85–23 (rev.): National Institutes of Health, Washing-
ton DC.

Reddy, B. S., Narisawa, T. & Weisburger, J. H.

(1976) Effect of a diet with high
levels of protein and fat on colon carcinogenesis in F344 rats treated with 1,
2-methyhydrazin. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 57: 567–569.

Reeves, P. G., Nielsen, F. H. & Fahey, G. C.

(1993) AIN-93 puriﬁed diets for
laboratory rodents: Final report of the American Institute of Nutrition Ad Hoc
Writing Committee on the reformulation of the AIN-76A rodent diet. J. Nutr.
123: 1939 –1951.

Sato, M., Narita, T., Kawakami-Kimura, N., Higashiyama, S., Taniguchi, N.,
Akiyama, S., Hashimoto, T., Manabe, T. & Kannagi, R.
Increased
expression of integrins by heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor in human
esophageal cancer cells. Cancer Lett. 102: 183–191.

(1996)

Scholar, E. M. & Toews, M. L.

Inhibition of invasion of murine mammary
carcinoma cells by the tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein. Cancer Lett. 87:
159 –162.

(1994)

Severson, R. K., Nomura, A.M.Y., Grove, J. S. & Stemmermann, G. N.

(1989) A
prospective study of demographics, diet, and prostate cancer among men of
Japanese ancestry in Hawaii. Cancer Res. 49: 1857–1860.

Shamsuddin, A. M., Elsayed, A. M. & Ullah, A.

(1988) Suppression of large
intestine cancer in F344 rats by inositol hexaphosphare. Carcinogenesis 9:
577–580.

Steel, R.G.D. & Torrie, J. H.

(1980) Enumeration data I: One-way classiﬁcations.
In: Principles and Procedures of Statistics: A Biometric Approach, 2nd ed.,
pp. 477–532. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.

Weimar, I. S., de Jong, D., Muller, E. J., Nakamura, T., van Gorp, J.M.H, de Gast,
G. C. & Gerritsen, W. R.
(1997) Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor
promotes adhesion of lymphoma cells to extracellular matrix molecules via
␣4␤1 and ␣5␤1 integrins. Blood 89: 990 –1000.

Welch, D. R., Neri, A. & Nicolson, G. L.

(1983) Comparison of ‘spontaneous’
and ‘experimental’ metastasis using rat 13762 mammary adenocarcinoma
metastatic cell clones. Invasion Metastasis 3: 65– 80.
Xu, X., Wang, H. J., Murphy, P. A., Cook, L. & Hendrich, S.

(1994) Daidzein is a
more bioavailable soymilk isoﬂavone than is genistein in adult women. J. Nutr.
124: 825– 832.

Yan, L., Yee, J. A., McGuire, M. H. & Graef, G. A.

(1997) Effect of dietary
supplementation of soybeans on experimental metastasis of melanoma cells
in mice. Nutr. Cancer 29: 1– 6.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/129/5/1075/4721937
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

ORIGINAL CONTRIBUTION

JAMA-EXPRESS

Effect of Selenium and Vitamin E on Risk
of Prostate Cancer and Other Cancers
The Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT)
Scott M. Lippman, MD
Eric A. Klein, MD
Phyllis J. Goodman, MS
M. Scott Lucia, MD
Ian M. Thompson, MD
Leslie G. Ford, MD
Howard L. Parnes, MD
Lori M. Minasian, MD
J. Michael Gaziano, MD, MPH
Jo Ann Hartline, MPH
J. Kellogg Parsons, MD, MHS
James D. Bearden III, MD
E. David Crawford, MD
Gary E. Goodman, MD
Jaime Claudio, MD
Eric Winquist, MD, MSc
Elise D. Cook, MD
Daniel D. Karp, MD
Philip Walther, MD
Michael M. Lieber, MD
Alan R. Kristal, DrPH
Amy K. Darke, MS
Kathryn B. Arnold, MS
Patricia A. Ganz, MD
Regina M. Santella, PhD
Demetrius Albanes, MD
Philip R. Taylor, MD, ScD
Jeffrey L. Probstfield, MD
T. J. Jagpal, CCRP
John J. Crowley, PhD
Frank L. Meyskens Jr, MD
Laurence H. Baker, DO

Context Secondary analyses of 2 randomized controlled trials and supportive epi-
demiologic and preclinical data indicated the potential of selenium and vitamin E for
preventing prostate cancer.
Objective To determine whether selenium, vitamin E, or both could prevent pros-
tate cancer and other diseases with little or no toxicity in relatively healthy men.
Design, Setting, and Participants A randomized, placebo-controlled trial (Sele-
nium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial [SELECT]) of 35 533 men from 427 par-
ticipating sites in the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico randomly assigned to 4
groups (selenium, vitamin E, selenium ⫹ vitamin E, and placebo) in a double-blind
fashion between August 22, 2001, and June 24, 2004. Baseline eligibility included age
50 years or older (African American men) or 55 years or older (all other men), a serum
prostate-specific antigen level of 4 ng/mL or less, and a digital rectal examination not
suspicious for prostate cancer.
Interventions Oral selenium (200 µg/d from L-selenomethionine) and matched vi-
tamin E placebo, vitamin E (400 IU/d of all rac-␣-tocopheryl acetate) and matched
selenium placebo, selenium ⫹ vitamin E, or placebo ⫹ placebo for a planned fol-
low-up of minimum of 7 years and a maximum of 12 years.
Main Outcome Measures Prostate cancer and prespecified secondary outcomes,
including lung, colorectal, and overall primary cancer.
Results As of October 23, 2008, median overall follow-up was 5.46 years (range,
4.17-7.33 years). Hazard ratios (99% confidence intervals [CIs]) for prostate cancer
were 1.13 (99% CI, 0.95-1.35; n=473) for vitamin E, 1.04 (99% CI, 0.87-1.24; n=432)
for selenium, and 1.05 (99% CI, 0.88-1.25; n=437) for selenium ⫹ vitamin E vs 1.00
(n=416) for placebo. There were no significant differences (all P⬎.15) in any other
prespecified cancer end points. There were statistically nonsignificant increased risks
of prostate cancer in the vitamin E group (P=.06) and type 2 diabetes mellitus in the
selenium group (relative risk, 1.07; 99% CI, 0.94-1.22; P=.16) but not in the sele-
nium ⫹ vitamin E group.
Conclusion Selenium or vitamin E, alone or in combination at the doses and formula-
tions used, did not prevent prostate cancer in this population of relatively healthy men.
Trial Registration clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT00006392
JAMA. 2009;301(1):39-51

www.jama.com

Author Affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Scott M. Lippman, MD, De-
partment of Thoracic and Head and Neck Medical On-
cology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 432, Houston, TX
77030-4009 (slippman@mdanderson.org), or Eric A.
Klein, MD, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medi-
cine, Desk A100, 9500 Euclid Ave, Cleveland, OH
44195 (kleine@ccf.org).

Charles A. Coltman Jr, MD PROSTATE CANCER MORTALITY IN

the United States has declined
in recent years, but this can-
cer remains the most com-
mon nonskin epithelial malignancy in
US men, with 186 320 new cases and
28 660 deaths (the second leading cause

See also pp 52 and 102.

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 39

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

of cancer death) estimated for 2008.1
An effective prevention strategy for
prostate cancer would have substan-
tial public health benefits, including the
potential to reduce the incidence of bio-
logically indolent prostate cancer,
which is significantly overdetected by
widespread screening with prostate-
specific antigen (PSA) and for which
most newly diagnosed men still un-
dergo curative-intent therapy involv-
ing substantial morbidity despite sur-
gical and other advances.2-6

Important secondary results of 2 ran-
domized controlled trials, the Nutri-
tional Prevention of Cancer (NPC)
study and the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-
Carotene Cancer Prevention (ATBC)
study, showed prostate cancer risk re-
ductions of 63% for selenized yeast and
32% for ␣-tocopherol (or vitamin E).7-10
In addition, a large-scale randomized
controlled trial11 involving several dif-
ferent regimens found that a combina-
tion of selenium, vitamin E, and beta
carotene reduced overall cancer mor-
tality. These clinical data, supported by
epidemiologic and preclinical data,12-19
led to the design of the Selenium and
Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial
(SELECT).20

Investigators in the United States and
Canada from major cooperative groups
of the National Cancer Institute and De-
partment of Veterans Affairs used the
Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial
(PCPT) accrual infrastructure (200
clinical sites, with 18 882 randomized
men) in designing and activating
SELECT. We report herein the effects
of selenium and vitamin E, alone or in
combination, on the risk of prostate
cancer and secondary end points in
SELECT.

METHODS
Study Design
SELECT is a phase 3 randomized, pla-
cebo-controlled trial of selenium (200
µg/d from L-selenomethionine), vita-
min E (400 IU/d of all rac-␣-tocoph-
eryl acetate), or both (planned fol-
low-up of minimum of 7 years and
maximum of 12 years) for prostate can-
cer prevention. The major eligibility re-

quirements included age 50 years or
older for African American men and 55
years or older for all other men, no prior
prostate cancer diagnosis, 4 ng/mL or
less of PSA in serum, and a digital rec-
tal examination (DRE) not suspicious
for cancer. No current use of antico-
agulant therapy other than 175 mg/d or
less of acetylsalicylic acid or 81 mg/d
or less of acetylsalicylic acid with clo-
pidogrel bisulfate, no history of hem-
orrhagic stroke, and normal blood pres-
sure were also required because of
antiplatelet effects of vitamin E and re-
lated findings of the ATBC study.

Participant characteristics were based
onself-report,includingself-identification
of race and ethnicity which were defined
by the US Census Bureau. Race and eth-
nicity data were collected mainly for the
generalizability of trial results. All poten-
tially eligible men were required to pro-
vide written informed consent before
being allowed to participate in the trial.
Thelocalinstitutionalreviewboardofeach
study site approved the study for activa-
tion and reviewed its progress annually.
The trial was activated in July 2001 and
follow-upblindedtothetrialresultsended
on October 23, 2008.

Baseline blood and toenail speci-
mens and a 5-year blood sample were
collected for future biological studies.
Prostate tissue samples collected dur-
ing the trial were submitted for confir-
mation by central pathology review (no
samples were collected at baseline). Par-
ticipants without prostate cancer had
clinic visits once every 6 months
throughout the trial; with prostate can-
cer, annually. Adherence and adverse
events were monitored every 6 months
and a limited physical examination in-
cluding assessments of blood pres-
sure, weight, and smoking status was
conducted annually. Prespecified ad-
verse events known to be associated
with vitamin E or selenium were graded
according to the National Cancer In-
stitute Common Toxicity Criteria.

Although eligible PSA and DRE re-
sults were required at study entry, an-
nual prostate cancer screening with PSA
and DRE was not mandatory because
the benefits of this screening were un-

der debate when the trial opened and
community screening standards were
expected to change during the trial. Par-
ticipants were recommended during an-
nual clinic visits to undergo a PSA test
and DRE according to the standard of
care at their study sites and the partici-
pant’s preferences. A formal preran-
domization period (28-90 days; no pla-
cebo run-in capsules) gave potential
participants time to decide if they would
agree to stop disallowed over-the-
counter supplements of selenium or vi-
tamin E throughout the study and to
demonstrate, by returning for random-
ization, their willingness to adhere to
the trial. Other adherence methods in-
cluded offering each participant a free
multivitamin containing no selenium
or vitamin E and assessing serum lev-
els of vitamin E and selenium in all par-
ticipants at a subset of study sites (22
sites representing 7.8% of the trial
population). These sites were chosen
a priori to be representative of the broad
range of sites in the trial.

End Point Assessment
Participants reported prostate cancers
to the study site staff. Study staff ob-
tained medical records supporting the
diagnosis and abstracted the diagnos-
tic method and clinical stage. Tissue and
the corresponding pathology report
were sent to the central pathology labo-
ratory for confirmation. Gleason Score
was based on central pathology review.
Men were asked at their first 6-month
clinic visit to report new events since
entering the trial and thereafter to re-
port new events since their last visit.
Cardiac-event data were collected in de-
tail from the trial beginning (2001); data
on diabetes were added through self-
reported glitazone medication use (be-
ginning in 2003) and self-report of dia-
betes (beginning in 2005) via the
following question at each clinic visit:
“Does the participant report having dia-
betes (either his doctor told him he has
diabetes or he is taking medication for
diabetes)?”

A general question regarding any
events considered severe or life-
threatening (grade 3 or 4), regardless

40 JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 (Reprinted)

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

of attribution to the study supple-
ments, was also asked. A Social Secu-
rity Death Index search was con-
ducted in July 2008 for participants who
had a last contact date of more than 18
months before the search. Other spe-
cifically queried events (known at study
inception to be related to either of the
study supplements) included alope-
cia, dermatitis, fatigue, halitosis, nail
changes, and nausea.

Statistical Analysis
The primary end point was prostate can-
cer incidence as determined by routine
clinical management. Cancers that were
not confirmed centrally were included
in the analysis. SELECT was designed as
a 4 group trial with 5 prespecified com-
parisons (selenium vs placebo, vitamin
E vs placebo, selenium ⫹ vitamin E vs
placebo, selenium vs selenium ⫹ vita-
min E, and vitamin E vs selenium ⫹ vi-
tamin E). With a sample size of 32 400
men, using a 1-sided ␣=.005 level
(equivalent to a 2-sided ␣=.01 level),
there was 96% power to detect a 25% re-

duction in prostate cancer for either of
the single agents (vs placebo), 89% power
to detect a 25% reduction for selenium
⫹ vitamin E (vs an active single agent)
and more than 99% power to detect a
44% reduction of selenium ⫹ vitamin E
(vs placebo).

Design assumptions were based on
the PCPT, ATBC, and NPC trials.
The details of the statistical design
have been described elsewhere.20
Important elements included (1)
constant accrual over 5 years; (2)
prostate cancer incidence in the pla-
cebo group based on PCPT for the
first 3 years and the 1995 Puget
Sound SEER registry afterward; (3)
adherence to the study supplements,
which was assumed to decrease over
the course of the trial with a 5-year
rate of 68% and 12-year rate of 51%;
(4) a constant 10% drop-in rate,
defined as participants receiving pla-
cebo who are taking active supple-
mentation off-study; (5) loss to
follow-up of 0.5% per year; and (6)
deaths estimated from PCPT for

years 1 to 3 and from the 1995 US
standard rates of men aged 63 years
and all races for year 4 onward. The
sample size was calculated to be
32 400 men and the number of pros-
tate cancers expected in the placebo
group was 533 over 12 years. Under
the assumed conditions, the required
median time under observation was
estimated to be 8.8 years.

The primary analysis consisted of the
5 prespecified comparisons detailed
above. These comparisons allowed for
a meaningful analysis of the study re-
sults whether an interaction between vi-
tamin E and selenium occurred. Each
individual test was conducted at a
1-sided ␣=.005 level (equivalent to a
2-sided ␣=.01 level) using a Bonfer-
roni factor of 5 to preserve an overall
1-sided ␣=.0025 level (equivalent to a
2-sided ␣=.05 level).

An independent data and safety
monitoring committee met yearly and
reviewed data on safety, adherence, and
diagnosis of prostate cancer. In addi-
tion to the final analysis, interim analy-

Figure 1. Flow of Participants Included in Analysis by Intervention Group

35 533 Men randomized at 427 participating sites

8856 Randomized to receive placebo

+ placebo
8696 Received placebo + placebo

as randomized

8904 Randomized to receive vitamin E +

placebo
8737 Received vitamin E + placebo

as randomized

8910 Randomized to receive selenium

+ placebo
8752 Received selenium + placebo

as randomized

8863 Randomized to receive selenium

+ vitamin E
8703 Received selenium + placebo

as randomized

160 Excluded

167 Excluded

158 Excluded

160 Excluded

155 Removed from 2

participating sites (poor
data and participant
management and
regulatory issues)

5 Ineligible

156 Removed from 2

participating sites (poor
data and participant
management and
regulatory issues)

11 Ineligible

155 Removed from 2

participating sites (poor
data and participant
management and
regulatory issues)

3 Ineligible

155 Removed from 2

participating sites (poor
data and participant
management and
regulatory issues)

5 Ineligible

1 Had prior prostate

4

cancer
Randomized in error
(never received proper
informed consent)

5 Had prior prostate

6

cancer
Randomized in error
(never received proper
informed consent)

1 Had prior prostate

2

cancer
Randomized in error
(never received proper
informed consent)

2 Had prior prostate

3

cancer
Randomized in error
(never received proper
informed consent)

133 Clinically ineligiblea

128 Clinically ineligiblea

113 Clinically ineligiblea

113 Clinically ineligiblea

154 Insufficient baseline data to completely

evaluate clinical eligibilityb

151 Insufficient baseline data to completely

evaluate clinical eligibilityb

166 Insufficient baseline data to completely

evaluate clinical eligibilityb

169 Insufficient baseline data to completely

evaluate clinical eligibilityb

420 Lost to follow-up (last contact data

>24 mo before analysis)c

385 Lost to follow-up (last contact data

>24 mo before analysis)c

434 Lost to follow-up (last contact data

>24 mo before analysis)c

379 Lost to follow-up (last contact data

>24 mo before analysis)c

8696 Included in primary analysis

8737 Included in primary analysis

8752 Included in primary analysis

8703 Included in primary analysis

aDue to increased blood pressure, high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, suspicious digital rectal examination (DRE) or increased prostate-specific antigen (PSA),

aspirin dosage, prior cancer less than 5 years before randomization, participation in another clinical trial, or other clinical reason.

bBlood pressure, PSA, and/or DRE not performed within required time frame (but normal) or other data-related reason.
cAll data up until the last contact are included; these men also could have been either clinically ineligible or had insufficient baseline data. For time-to-event analyses,

these men were censored at their last follow-up.

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 41

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

ses were planned for years 5, 7, 9, 10,
and 11 after the first participant was
randomized; the percentages of the ex-
pected total number of prostate can-
cer events in the placebo group at each
interval were 14%, 35%, 61%, 74%, and
88%, respectively. Each interim analy-
sis resulted in recommendations that
could have included modifications to
the study, including termination of ac-
crual, modifications to data collec-
tion, or early reporting of results. Rec-
ommendations were made to the
steering committee, which made the fi-
nal decisions.

The interim analyses tested the null
hypothesis at a 1-sided ␣=.0005 level
(equivalent to a 2-sided ␣=.001 level)

using the Cox proportional hazards re-
gression model. In addition, the alter-
native hypothesis of a 25% reduction in
prostate cancer incidence was tested at
a 1-sided level of ␣=.0005 (equivalent to
a 2-sided ␣=.001 level) using an exten-
sion of the Cox proportional hazards re-
gression model that allows for testing a
relative risk (RR) not equal to 1. The pur-
pose of the second analysis was to al-
low for the study to stop if it was deter-
mined that the expected reduction in
prostate cancer would not be observed.
The frequencies of the number of car-
diovascular events and cases of diabe-
tes were tested with a ␹2 test. For car-
diovascular event and diabetes analyses,
we did not capture the report of the date

of the event, which thus was not incor-
porated into the analysis.

Participants were randomized in a
randomized block scheme, in which
the block was the study site. This
ensured a balance of the 4 interven-
tion groups within each study site. All
analyses were performed by using an
intention-to-treat analysis in which
men were classified according to the
group to which they were random-
ized. All men were followed up until
death or loss to follow-up. For cancer
end points, men were censored at the
time of their last follow-up or death.
The analysis did not incorporate
adjustments for baseline covariates.
Data were analyzed by using SAS ver-

Table 1. Baseline Characteristics of Study Participants

Characteristics

Age, y

Median (interquartile range)
50-54
55-64
65-74
ⱖ75

Race/ethnicity

White
African American
Hispanic (non-African American)
Hispanic (African American)
Othera

Education (highest level)

ⱕHigh school graduate or GED
Some college/vocational school
ⱖCollege graduate
Unknown/missing

PSA, ng/mL
0.1-1.0
1.1-2.0
2.1-3.0
3.1-4.0
⬎4.0
Unknown/missing

Smoking status

Never
Current
Former
Ever (unknown status)
Unknown

No. (%) of Participants

Placebo
(n = 8696)

Vitamin E
(n = 8737)

Selenium
(n = 8752)

62.6 (58.1-67.8)
355 (4)
5078 (58)
2702 (31)
561 (6)

62.3 (58.0-67.8)
402 (5)
5143 (59)
2641 (30)
551 (6)

62.6 (58.2-68.0)
337 (4)
5076 (58)
2733 (31)
606 (7)

Selenium ⫹
Vitamin E
(n = 8703)

62.4 (58.1-67.8)
385 (4)
5052 (58)
2731 (31)
535 (6)

6863 (79)
1078 (12)
492 (6)
76 (1)
187 (2)

1993 (23)
2291 (26)
4317 (50)
95 (1)

4122 (47)
2728 (31)
1168 (13)
666 (8)

5 (⬍1)
7 (⬍1)

3682 (42)
655 (8)
4208 (48)
63 (1)
88 (1)

6890 (79)
1107 (13)
477 (5)
103 (1)
160 (2)

1875 (22)
2387 (27)
4394 (51)
81 (1)

4208 (48)
2653 (30)
1228 (14)
634 (7)

3 (⬍1)
11 (⬍1)

3752 (43)
659 (8)
4194 (48)
55 (1)
77 (1)

6942 (79)
1053 (12)
481 (5)
86 (1)
190 (2)

1917 (22)
2327 (27)
4430 (51)
78 (1)

4218 (48)
2661 (30)
1211 (14)
652 (7)

2 (⬍1)
8 (⬍1)

3780 (43)
631 (7)
4214 (48)
61 (1)
66 (1)

6874 (79)
1076 (12)
484 (6)
95 (1)
174 (2)

1898 (22)
2348 (27)
4372 (50)
85 (1)

4213 (48)
2666 (31)
1149 (13)
659 (8)

1 (⬍1)
15 (⬍1)

3666 (42)
670 (8)
4242 (49)
56 (1)
69 (1)

Abbreviations: GED, general equivalency diploma; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
SI conversion: To convert PSA to µg/L, multiply by 1.0.
a Other race/ethnicity include Asian (n=420), Native American (n=99), Pacific Islander (n=39), multiple races (n=34), and unknown (n=119).

42 JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 (Reprinted)

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

sion 9.1 (SAS Institute Inc, Cary,
North Carolina).

Supplement Quality Control
and Quality Assurance
The Pharmacy Coordinating Center
received the study supplements for
bottling as finished capsules in
shipments containing lots of ac-
tive capsules along with the ap-
propriate matching placebo. As
required by current good manufac-
turing practice,21 each lot of capsules
was quarantined upon receipt until
testing was performed to ensure that
capsules labeled “active” by the

manufacturer contained the ap-
propriate active agent and that cap-
sules labeled as “placebo” did
not contain an active agent. In addi-
tion, each time the capsules were
bottled, production-run-verification
testing was performed to ensure that
bottles labeled as an active agent or
placebo contained the appropriate
material. To ensure that the quality
of the blind was maintained, cap-
sules received in each subsequent
lot were compared with the previous
lot and with matching capsules in
the current shipment for their char-
acteristics of weight, shape and size,

color and external marking, odor,
and comparability of contents of
opened capsules. Whether the par-
ticipant guessed or had an external
validation of whether he was getting
the active agent or placebo was not
assessed.

RESULTS
On September 15, 2008, the indepen-
dent data and safety monitoring com-
mittee met, reviewed data as of August
1, 2008, for the second formal interim
analysis, and recommended the discon-
tinuation of study supplements be-
cause the alternative hypothesis of no evi-

Table 2. Adherence to Study Supplements by Pill Counts and Bioadherence

Pill Countsa
Selenium/matching placebo

Year 1 (n=34 708)
Year 2 (n=34 163)
Year 3 (n=33 616)
Year 4 (n=32 976)
Year 5 (n=23 419)

Vitamin E/matching placebo

Year 1 (n=34 708)
Year 2 (n=34 163)
Year 3 (n=33 616)
Year 4 (n=32 976)
Year 5 (n=23 419)

Bioadherence
Serum selenium, µg/L

Baseline
6-mo visit
1st annual visit
2nd annual visit
4th annual visitc

Cholesterol-adjusted ␣-tocopherol, µg/mL

Baseline
6-mo visit
1st annual visit
2nd annual visit
4th annual visitc

Cholesterol-adjusted ␥-tocopherol, µg/mL

Baseline
6-mo visit
1st annual visit
2nd annual visit
4th annual visitc

Placebo

85 (76-85)
81 (72-81)
76 (68-77)
69 (65-73)
69 (63-71)

85 (76-85)
80 (71-80)
75 (67-75)
70 (63-72)
67 (61-69)

Placebo
(n = 285)

% (Range)b

Selenium

Selenium ⫹ Vitamin E

84 (76-84)
79 (71-80)
75 (68-76)
71 (64-72)
69 (62-70)

85 (76-85)
79 (70-79)
74 (67-75)
69 (62-71)
67 (61-69)

85 (77-84)
80 (72-80)
76 (69-77)
72 (65-74)
70 (64-71)

85 (77-85)
79 (71-80)
76 (69-77)
70 (63-72)
68 (61-70)

Vitamin E

85 (77-85)
80 (72-81)
77 (69-77)
73 (66-74)
71 (64-73)

85 (77-85)
80 (71-80)
75 (67-76)
70 (63-72)
69 (62-71)

Median (Interquartile Range)

Vitamin E
(n = 290)

Selenium
(n = 277)

Selenium ⫹ Vitamin E

(n = 257)

137.6 (124.7-151.8)
137.4 (123.3-152.0)
138.1 (125.2-152.2)
132.0 (120.8-143.1)
140.1 (124.3-150.8)

12.45 (10.70-14.95)
11.68 (10.09-13.61)
11.68 (10.24-13.44)
12.13 (10.80-13.72)
12.09 (9.95-14.41)

1.31 (0.83-2.01)
1.50 (1.07-1.97)
1.53 (1.09-2.05)
1.57 (1.13-2.13)
1.69 (1.14-2.29)

135.9 (122.4-148.4)
138.4 (124.1-154.0)
137.7 (124.1-150.4)
129.8 (120.1-139.9)
143.8 (126.2-158.6)

12.79 (10.69-15.37)
18.14 (15.21-22.45)
18.50 (15.08-22.46)
18.35 (15.13-22.85)
16.57 (13.86-22.61)

1.43 (0.89-2.21)
0.78 (0.51-1.12)
0.75 (0.52-1.16)
0.74 (0.49-1.08)
0.80 (0.50-1.23)

135.0 (123.4-145.9)
223.4 (198.6-251.8)
232.4 (204.2-261.4)
228.0 (206.3-256.9)
251.6 (218.7-275.0)

12.58 (10.43-14.75)
11.62 (10.10-13.44)
11.69 (10.10-13.03)
11.80 (10.57-13.58)
12.03 (9.57-13.53)

1.50 (0.96-2.21)
1.64 (1.22-2.29)
1.69 (1.27-2.33)
1.76 (1.26-2.43)
1.90 (1.48-2.70)

136.4 (122.9-150.0)
227.0 (199.4-251.2)
228.5 (205.5-258.1)
220.7 (194.0-249.5)
253.1 (210.5-283.0)

12.20 (10.12-15.35)
17.90 (15.11-20.84)
18.04 (14.77-22.35)
18.44 (15.32-22.89)
17.87 (14.68-22.31)

1.44 (0.96-2.02)
0.74 (0.48-1.11)
0.70 (0.48-1.04)
0.66 (0.50-1.03)
0.69 (0.47-1.07)

SI conversions: To convert serum selenium to µmol/L, multiply by 0.0127; ␣-tocopherol and ␥-tocopherol to µmol/L, multiply by 23.22.
a Percentage of men adherent, defined as taking at least 80% of their study supplements. Denominators decrease over time reflecting the varying amounts of follow-up.
b These ranges are estimates including those with missing data and assumes those missing were either all not adherent (low estimate) or all adherent (high estimate).
c Numbers of participants for 4th annual visit are placebo (n=79), vitamin E (n=78), selenium (n=72), and selenium ⫹ vitamin E (n=71).

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 43

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

dence of benefit from either study agent
was convincingly demonstrated
(P⬍.0001) and there was no possibil-
ity of a benefit to the planned degree with

additional follow-up. Study sites were no-
tified to discontinue supplements on Oc-
tober 23, 2008, and the data presented
in this article are current as of this date.

Participants
A total of 35 533 men were accrued and
randomly assigned at 427 participat-
ing sites in the United States, Canada,

Table 3. Clinically Diagnosed Prostate Cancers

No. (%) of Participants

Total No. of prostate cancers diagnosed by study site
Method of diagnoses

Prostate biopsy
Other/unknown

No. of total prostate biopsies
PSA testsa
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
DRE testsa
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5

Reason for biopsy (positive biopsies)

Increased PSA
PSA prompting biopsy, median (IQR), ng/mL
PSA velocity
Abnormal DRE
Increased PSA/PSA velocity ⫹ abnormal DRE
Other

T stage

T1a-c
T2a-b
T3a-b
TX/not staged

N stage
N0
N1
NX/not staged

M stage
M0
M1a-b
MX/not staged

Gleason scoreb

No. graded by central laboratory
2-6
7 (grade 3 ⫹ grade 4)
7 (grade 4 ⫹ grade 3)
8-10

Placebo
(n = 8696)

416

Vitamin E
(n = 8737)

473

404 (97)
12 (3)

1020

6708 (83)
6641 (86)
6284 (85)
6043 (85)
4265 (84)

5766 (72)
5567 (72)
5180 (70)
4862 (69)
3420 (68)

458 (97)
15 (3)

1011

6876 (84)
6652 (85)
6334 (85)
6087 (84)
4246 (84)

5936 (73)
5563 (72)
5188 (70)
4823 (67)
3418 (68)

Selenium
(n = 8752)

Selenium ⫹
Vitamin E
(n = 8703)

432

419 (97)
13 (3)
982

6807 (84)
6635 (85)
6376 (85)
6065 (85)
4271 (84)

5870 (72)
5561 (72)
5198 (70)
4878 (69)
3397 (68)

437

420 (96)
17 (4)
997

6838 (84)
6673 (86)
6349 (85)
6045 (84)
4257 (84)

5833 (72)
5591 (72)
5190 (70)
4878 (68)
3425 (68)

259 (64)
4.60 (4.00-5.50)

324 (71)
4.60 (3.99-5.60)

296 (71)
4.83 (4.05-5.70)

263 (63)
4.70 (4.00-5.60)

12 (3)
66 (16)
55 (14)
8 (2)

278 (70)
122 (30)
0 (0)
16

109 (100)

0 (0)

307

124 (100)

0 (0)

292

365
240 (66)
80 (22)
21 (6)
24 (7)

10 (2)
58 (13)
49 (11)
13 (3)

343 (75)
114 (25)
2 (0)
14

127 (100)

0 (0)

346

134 (99)
2 (1)

337

396
249 (63)
97 (24)
27 (7)
23 (6)

13 (3)
46 (11)
56 (13)
12 (3)

301 (73)
108 (26)
5 (1)
18

125 (99)
1 (1)

306

122 (96)
5 (4)

305

361
217 (60)
105 (29)
19 (5)
20 (6)

16 (4)
56 (13)
72 (17)
17 (4)

286 (69)
128 (31)
3 (1)
20

117 (100)

0 (0)

320

119 (98)
2 (2)

316

365
220 (60)
91 (25)
24 (7)
30 (8)

Abbreviations: DRE, digital rectal examination; IQR, interquartile range; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
SI conversion: To convert PSA to µg/L, multiply by 1.0.
a Percentages are based on alive participants who are prostate cancer–free and for whom the form was submitted.
b Gleason score was based on central pathology review. The Gleason grade ranges from 1 to 5, with 5 having the worst prognosis. The Gleason score ranges from 2 to 10, with 10

having the worst prognosis.

44 JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 (Reprinted)

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018and Puerto Rico between August 22,
2001, and June 24, 2004. FIGURE 1
shows the SELECT randomization
scheme including participants who
were excluded from analyses; all 621
participants at 2 study sites were re-
moved from the analysis because of se-
vere problems that were detected early
on including poor data and partici-
pant management and regulatory is-
sues. These participants differed sub-
stantially from the rest of the SELECT
population in being from sites in the
south of the United States, 99% Afri-
can American, younger (median age 57
years), and of a lower education level
(67% had ⬍high school education), and
in having lower PSA levels (57% had
⬍1.0 ng/mL) and a higher prevalence
of current smokers (33%). An addi-
tional 9 participants were removed be-
cause they were found to have had pros-
tate cancer at randomization and 15
were removed because their informed
consent was never received. More men
were accrued (35 533 in 3 years) than
initially planned (32 400 in 5 years)
mainly because of a faster-than-
expected accrual rate and the admin-
istrative time it takes to close down
accrual.

The baseline characteristics of
SELECT participants by each of the 4
groups (placebo, vitamin E, selenium,
and selenium ⫹ vitamin E) are shown
in TABLE 1. All potentially important
risk factors were well balanced among
the groups. A total of 2.6% of SELECT
men were former PCPT men random-
ized to finasteride; during the trial,
4.8% of the non-PCPT participants
reported use of finasteride at 5 mg
(n=1602) or 1 mg (n=86).

The median overall follow-up was
5.46 years (range, 4.17-7.33 years). The
percentages of participants with a re-
cent last-contact date were more than
88% within 7 months and 92% within
13 months of the SELECT data analy-
sis. Loss to follow-up, defined as hav-
ing a last contact date of more than 24
months before analysis, involved 5.1%
of participants, which was higher than
had been estimated for the trial design
(3.5% at 7 years after trial activation).

SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

Figure 2. Cumulative Incidence of Prostate Cancer Detected Each Year by Intervention
Group

Placebo
Vitamin E
Selenium
Selenium + vitamin E

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Years After Randomization

No. at risk
Placebo
Vitamin E
Selenium
Selenium + vitamin E

8689
8732
8750
8700

8553
8610
8597
8585

8328
8373
8341
8371

8039
8098
8083
8097

7389
7401
7393
7428

4892
4867
4848
4894

2516
2537
2558
2580

Compared with placebo, there was a statistically nonsignificant increase in prostate cancer in the vitamin E
group (P=.06) and not in the selenium ⫹ vitamin E group (P=.52) or the selenium group (P=.62).

Adherence to both study agents as de-
termined by pill count was similar across
all study groups, and averaged 83% at
year 1 and 65% at year 5. Adherence to
at least 1 of the 2 agents was 87% at year
1 and 72% at year 5 (the design-
estimated adherence rates were 90% at
year 1 and 68% at year 5). Bioadher-
ence was measured in a subset of par-
ticipants by serum levels of selenium and
cholesterol-adjusted ␣-tocopherol and ␥-
tocopherol (which is suppressed by ␣-
tocopherol) and showed a good separa-
tion in agent serum levels between the
groups (TABLE 2). The drop-in rate was
assessed by a direct question to the par-
ticipants about taking either of the
supplements. Positive responses were
3.1% or less for vitamin E and 1.8% or
less for selenium in each year (below the
design drop-in estimate of 10%). Pros-
tate tissue samples were sent to the cen-
tral pathology laboratory for confirma-
tion in 86% of cases. The central
laboratory agreed with the clinical site’s
prostate cancer diagnosis in 99% of these
cases.

Prostate Cancer
There were no statistically significant dif-
ferences in the rates of prostate cancer
between the 4 groups (placebo, 416 cases
[5-year rate of 4.43%]; selenium, 432

cases [4.56%]; vitamin E, 473 cases
[4.93%]; selenium ⫹ vitamin E, 437
cases [4.56%]) (TABLE 3 and FIGURE 2).
Compared with placebo, the hazard ra-
tios (HRs) for prostate cancer were 1.13
(99% confidence interval [CI], 0.95-
1.35; 95% CI, 0.99-1.29; P=.06) in the
vitamin E-alone group, 1.05 (99% CI,
0.88-1.25; 95% CI, 0.91-1.20; P=.52)
in the selenium ⫹ vitamin E group, and
1.04 (99% CI, 0.87-1.24; 95% CI, 0.90-
1.18; P = .62) in the selenium-alone
group. The data and safety monitor-
ing committee had some concern over
the statistically nonsignificant in-
crease in prostate cancer in the vita-
min E-alone group (P=.09 per interim
data of August 1, 2008) and over a non-
significant increase in diabetes melli-
tus associated with selenium (P=.08 per
interim data of August 1, 2008).

The majority of prostate cancers di-
agnosed during the trial were early-
stage and low-grade, and cancer stage
and grade were similar across all groups
(Table 3). The percentage of patients
who had an annual PSA examination
and DRE was similarly high and the bi-
opsy rate was similar across all groups,
indicating that the prostate cancer find-
ings were not due to screening-
associated detection bias. More than
95% of prostate cancers were diag-

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 45

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

nosed by biopsy, the triggers for which
(based on PSA and other factors) are
shown in Table 3 and were similar
across all groups. The number of pros-
tate cancers in the placebo cohort was
higher than what was estimated at study
inception. This was due to the faster
than expected accrual, the larger than
expected sample size, and higher base-
line PSA levels than anticipated.

Secondary Outcomes
There were no significant differences
(all P⬎.15) in any prespecified second-
ary cancer end points (FIGURE 3 and
TABLE 4). At 5 years, the cumulative

death rate in the placebo group was 38
deaths per 1000 participants (95% CI,
34 deaths per 1000 participants to 42
deaths per 1000 participants); the es-
timated rate at trial inception was 48
deaths per 1000 participants. The num-
bers of deaths from any cause were simi-
lar across the 4 groups (382 in pla-
cebo group, 358 in vitamin E group,
378 in selenium group, and 359 in se-
lenium ⫹ vitamin E group).

The study agents had no significant
effects on the overall incidence of car-
diovascular events (Table 4). A statis-
tically nonsignificant increase in type
2 diabetes mellitus (diagnosed after ran-

domization) occurred in the selenium-
alone group vs placebo group (n=724;
10.0%; 99% CI, 9.1%-11.0%; vs n=669;
9.3%; 99% CI, 8.5%-10.2%, respec-
tively; RR, 1.07; 99% CI, 0.94-1.22;
P=.16). The number (percentage) of
cases of diabetes mellitus was 700
(9.7%; 99% CI, 8.8%-10.6%) in the vi-
tamin E group and 660 (9.1%; 99% CI,
8.2%-10.0%) in the selenium ⫹ vita-
min E group (P values of these data
compared with placebo were 0.47 for
vitamin E and 0.61 for selenium ⫹ vi-
tamin E). Data on known, clinically less
significant adverse effects of the study
agents (alopecia, dermatitis, halitosis,

Figure 3. Cumulative Incidence of Lung Cancer, Colorectal Cancer, All Other Primary Cancers, and Deaths by Intervention Group

Lung Cancer

Placebo
Vitamin E
Selenium
Selenium + vitamin E

0.020

0.018

0.016

0.014

0.012

0.010

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

Colorectal Cancer

0.020

0.018

0.016

0.014

0.012

0.010

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Years After Randomization

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Years After Randomization

No. at risk
Placebo
Vitamin E
Selenium
Selenium + vitamin E

8689
8732
8750
8700

8577
8630
8621
8598

8440
8491
8447
8457

8224
8290
8257
8264

7602
7647
7597
7647

5087
5073
5010
5067

2626
2649
2657
2674

No. at risk
Placebo
Vitamin E
Selenium
Selenium + vitamin E

8689
8732
8750
8700

8571
8628
8615
8597

8431
8476
8432
8447

8207
8277
8240
8245

7582
7625
7576
7629

5068
5062
5000
5050

2613
2641
2648
2655

All Other Cancers

Deaths

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Years After Randomization

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Years After Randomization

No. at risk
Placebo
Vitamin E
Selenium
Selenium + vitamin E

8689
8732
8750
8700

8532
8602
8587
8557

8362
8427
8378
8398

8113
8190
8160
8176

7466
7518
7488
7529

4977
4954
4913
4972

2553
2578
2594
2610

No. at risk
Placebo
Vitamin E
Selenium
Selenium + vitamin E

8689
8732
8750
8700

8585
8639
8628
8610

8454
8505
8460
8475

8236
8310
8277
8285

7617
7662
7622
7679

5100
5086
5029
5089

2631
2653
2667
2684

There were no significant differences in any prespecified secondary cancer or death end points (all P⬎.15). The blue portions of the y-axes indicate 0 to 0.02 cancer probability.

46 JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 (Reprinted)

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

nail changes, fatigue, and nausea) are
shown in TABLE 5. The only statisti-
cally significant differences (P⬍.01)
were for selenium vs placebo for alo-
pecia and grades 1 to 2 dermatitis.

COMMENT
In SELECT, neither 200 µg of selenome-
thionine or 400 IU of synthetic DL ␣-
tocopherol,givenorallyaloneorcombined
for a median of 5.5 years had significant
effects on the primary or secondary end
points. A statistically nonsignificant in-
creased incidence of prostate cancer
(P=.06) was observed in the vitamin E
group but not in the selenium ⫹ vitamin
E group. The trial supplements were dis-

continued early (in year 7 of the overall
12-yearstudy)inaccordancewithaunani-
mous recommendation of the data and
safetymonitoringcommitteestatingthat,
based on the evidence to date from the
7-yearplannedinterimanalyses,therewas
no evidence of a benefit from either study
agent and no possibility of a benefit to
theplanneddegreewithadditionalfollow-
up.Sensitivityanalysessuggestedthatthe
prespecified 25% risk reduction was ex-
tremely unlikely to be reached for either
agent even with additional exposure.

The statistical assumptions made in
SELECT involving accrual rate, study
supplement adherence and drop-in
rates, prostate cancer incidence, death

rate, and loss to follow-up were largely
met and gave the trial significant power
to detect the estimated preventive ef-
fects. Furthermore, the large sample
size, inclusion of a substantial propor-
tion of non-white men, and equal dis-
tribution of known risk factors across
all trial groups make the conclusions
drawn from SELECT especially ro-
bust and generalizable.

Why were selenium and vitamin E in-
effective in preventing prostate cancer in
SELECT despite strong secondary evi-
dence suggesting efficacy?7,8 Consider-
ing selenium first, the secondary reduc-
tion in prostate cancer incidence in the
NPC study could have been subject to

Table 4. Secondary Outcomes Including Diagnosis of Other Primary Cancers, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Events, and Deathsa

Placebo
(n = 8696)

Vitamin E
(n = 8737)

Selenium
(n = 8752)

Selenium ⫹ Vitamin E

(n = 8703)

Any cancer (including prostate)b

Lung
Colorectal
Other primary cancerc

Diabetesd
Cardiovascular events

Any (including death)
Nonfatal strokes
Hemorrhagic
Ischemic
Not specifiede

Other nonfatal (worst grade)f

Grade 3
Grade 4

Deaths

Cancer

Prostate
Lung
Colorectal
Other primary cancerc

Cardiovascular

Hemorrhagic stroke
Other cardiovascular

Other deaths

No.

of Men
824
67
60
306
No.

of Men
669

HR

(99% CI)

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

RR

(99% CI)

1 [Reference]

No.

of Men
856
67
66
274
No.

of Men
700

HR

(99% CI)

1.03 (0.91-1.17)
1.00 (0.64-1.55)
1.09 (0.69-1.73)
0.89 (0.72-1.10)

RR

(99% CI)

1.04 (0.91-1.18)

No.

of Men
837
75
63
292
No.

of Men
724

HR

(99% CI)

1.01 (0.89-1.15)
1.12 (0.73-1.72)
1.05 (0.66-1.67)
0.95 (0.77-1.17)

RR

(99% CI)

1.07 (0.94-1.22)

No.

of Men
846
78
77
290
No.

of Men
660

HR

(99% CI)

1.02 (0.90-1.16)
1.16 (0.76-1.78)
1.28 (0.82-2.00)
0.94 (0.76-1.16)

RR

(99% CI)

0.97 (0.85-1.11)

1050

1 [Reference]

1034

0.98 (0.88-1.09)

1080

1.02 (0.92-1.13)

1041

0.99 (0.89-1.10)

11
56
25

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

7
49
14

0.63 (0.18-2.20)
0.87 (0.53-1.44)
0.56 (0.24-1.32)

11
51
11

0.99 (0.33-2.98)
0.90 (0.55-1.49)
0.44 (0.17-1.11)

12
67
20

1.09 (0.37-3.19)
1.20 (0.75-1.90)
0.80 (0.37-1.73)

626
190
No.

of Men
382
125
0
41
10
74
142
8
134
115

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

HR

(99% CI)

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

642
203
No.

of Men
358
106
0
38
13
55
119
9
110
133

1.02 (0.89-1.17)
1.06 (0.82-1.38)

HR

(99% CI)

0.93 (0.77-1.13)
0.84 (0.60-1.18)

NA

0.92 (0.52-1.65)
1.30 (0.44-3.83)
0.74 (0.47-1.17)
0.84 (0.61-1.15)
1.12 (0.32-3.92)
0.82 (0.59-1.14)
1.15 (0.83-1.60)

685
193
No.

of Men
378
128
1
45
10
72
129
9
120
121

1.09 (0.95-1.25)
1.01 (0.78-1.31)

HR

(99% CI)

0.99 (0.82-1.19)
1.02 (0.74-1.41)

NA

1.10 (0.63-1.91)
1.00 (0.32-3.16)
0.97 (0.63-1.49)
0.91 (0.66-1.24)
1.12 (0.32-3.93)
0.89 (0.65-1.24)
1.05 (0.75-1.47)

624
201
No.

of Men
359
117
0
39
15
63
117
12
105
125

1.00 (0.87-1.15)
1.06 (0.82-1.37)

HR

(99% CI)

0.94 (0.77-1.13)
0.93 (0.67-1.30)

NA

0.95 (0.53-1.69)
1.49 (0.52-4.28)
0.85 (0.55-1.32)
0.82 (0.60-1.13)
1.49 (0.46-4.84)
0.78 (0.56-1.09)
1.08 (0.78-1.51)

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; HR, hazard ratio; NA, not applicable; RR, relative risk.
a The HRs and RRs given for vitamin E, selenium, and selenium ⫹ vitamin E groups are compared with the placebo group.
b No. of participants that had more than 1 cancer for each group are placebo (n=25), vitamin E (n=24), selenium (n=25), and selenium ⫹ vitamin E (n=36).
c Excluding basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers.
d Based on self-report or reported use of diabetes medications of the glitazone class; excludes prevalent cases at randomization.
e Not specified as to whether an ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke.
f According to National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria.

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 47

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

limitations inherent in secondary analy-
ses, such as chance findings due to mul-
tiple testing, especially because the over-
all NPC sample size was relatively small
(1312 men and women vs 29 133 men
in the ATBC study). Second, the formu-
lation (high-selenium yeast) given in the
NPC trial may have been more active
than the l-selenomethionine given in
SELECT (both trials gave an equivalent
selenium dose). In designing SELECT,
we carefully evaluated the choice of l-
selenomethionine vs high-selenium yeast
(and other formulations),20 and our ra-
tionale for selecting l-selenomethio-
nine included the following consider-
ations: selenomethionine was the major
component of apparently active high-
selenium yeast; evidence indicated sub-
stantial batch-to-batch variations in spe-
cific organoselenium compounds in
samples of NPC yeast, making it un-
likely that we could duplicate the sele-
nium yeast formulation used in the NPC
study; potential genotoxicity of highly ac-
tive inorganic selenium compounds,
such as selenite, made them potentially
unsuitable for long-term prevention; low-
ering (vs selenomethionine) of overall
body selenium stores with selenite, which
is neither absorbed nor retained well;
practical and safety concerns over newer
selenium compounds, such as mono-
methylated forms (eg, lacking availabil-

ity, investigational new drug certifica-
tion, and clinical data); and in vitro data
indicating that selenomethionine was ef-
fective in suppressing malignant and not
normal prostate cells.15

Despite this careful rationale, it is im-
possible to know now whether sele-
nized yeast would have been more ac-
tive than l-selenomethionine was in
SELECT. Finally, the NPC trial was con-
ducted in men chosen for deficient lev-
els of selenium, finding that selenium was
most preventive in the men with the low-
est baseline selenium levels9; SELECT
men generally were replete in selenium
at baseline, with median serum sele-
nium levels of 135 ng/mL vs 113 ng/mL
in NPC. The NPC cutpoint for the low-
est 2 tertiles was 121.6 units; 78% of
SELECT men were above this level. The
NPC trial found a nonsignificant in-
crease in overall cancer rate in its high-
est tertile (HR, 1.20; 95% CI, 0.77-1.86).22
There are potential reasons why vita-
min E did not prevent prostate cancer in
SELECT. First, the high dose (400 IU/d)
of the ␣-tocopherol form of vitamin E in
SELECT may have been less effective
than a lower dose such as the 8-fold lower
50 mg/d (roughly equivalent to 50 IU/d)
that produced the earlier positive sec-
ondary findings in the ATBC study.7 (The
vitamin E formulation, synthetic all rac-
␣-tocopheryl acetate, was the same in

SELECT and the ATBC study.) A sec-
ondary analysis of the HOPE trial23 found
that a relatively high dose of natural vi-
tamin E did not reduce prostate cancer
incidence. Achieving higher plasma or
tissue levels of ␣-tocopherol within the
physiological range, such as through a
50-mg/d supplement, may have some
prostate cancer (or other) preventive
effect such as cell proliferation or tu-
mor growth inhibition.24 Furthermore,
high pharmacological doses of ␣-
tocopherol may have an adverse effect on
cytochrome p450 enzyme and other
regulatory mechanisms25 that a lower
dose would not have. It is also possible
(but not certain) that the known effect
of ␣-tocopherol in suppressing poten-
tially beneficial plasma ␥-tocopherol lev-
els would have been less with the lower
than higher dose of ␣-tocopherol.20 Nev-
ertheless, men taking vitamin E with the
highest baseline (and thus total) serum
vitamin E levels in the ATBC study had
the highest reduction in prostate and
lung cancer,26 which supported our
choice of the higher dose. A higher dose
also was associated with potential ben-
efits such as reductions in aging-related
Alzheimer disease and macular degen-
eration.

Second, several studies have sug-
gested that vitamin E is more protective
against prostate cancer in smokers, and

Table 5. Adverse Events Known to Be Associated With the Study Supplementsa

Adverse Event

Alopecia
Dermatitis

Grades 1-2
Grades 3-4

Halitosis
Nail changes
Fatigue

Grades 1-2
Grades 3-4

Nausea

Grades 1-2
Grade 3

Placebo
(n = 8696)

Vitamin E
(n = 8737)

Selenium
(n = 8752)

Selenium ⫹ Vitamin E

(n = 8703)

No.

of Men
206

RR

(99% CI)

1 [Reference]

No.

of Men
220

516
8
427
1035

586
24

203
9

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

1 [Reference]
1 [Reference]

591
12
493
1041

604
29

191
3

RR (99% CI)

1.06 (0.83-1.36)

1.14 (0.98-1.32)
1.49 (0.46-4.83)
1.15 (0.97-1.36)
1.00 (0.90-1.11)

1.03 (0.89-1.19)
1.20 (0.59-2.45)

0.94 (0.72-1.21)
0.33 (0.06-1.85)

No.

of Men
265

605
14
503
1087

645
21

244
9

RR (99% CI)

1.28 (1.01-1.62)b

1.17 (1.00-1.35)b
1.74 (0.56-5.44)
1.17 (0.99-1.38)
1.04 (0.94-1.16)

1.09 (0.95-1.26)
0.87 (0.40-1.88)

1.19 (0.94-1.52)
0.99 (0.30-3.34)

No.

of Men
238

554
16
531
1075

612
20

202
8

RR (99% CI)

1.15 (0.91-1.47)

1.07 (0.92-1.25)
2.00 (0.66-6.09)
1.24 (1.06-1.46)
1.04 (0.93-1.15)

1.04 (0.90-1.20)
0.83 (0.38-1.81)

0.99 (0.77-1.28)
0.89 (0.25-3.10)

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; RR, relative risk.
a The RRs given for vitamin E, selenium, and selenium ⫹ vitamin E groups are compared with the placebo group. Maximum grade experienced by a participant are given. Alopecia,
halitosis, and nail changes were only defined for grades 1 and 2. National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria were used for alopecia, nail changes, fatigue, and nausea.
Halitosis and dermatitis were defined in the study protocol. Generally, grade 1=mild, grade 2=moderate, grade 3=severe, and grade 4=life-threatening.

b P ⬍.01.

48 JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 (Reprinted)

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018less than 60% of SELECT men were cur-
rent or former smokers (whereas all men
in the ATBC study were smokers). For
example, observational analyses in a trial-
based cohort of the Prostate, Lung, Co-
lorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening
Trial (PLCO),27 a trial of screening vs
standard health care routines, showed a
71% reduction in the incidence of ad-
vanced prostate cancer associated with
supplemental vitamin E use in current
and recent smokers. A subgroup analy-
sis of current and former smokers in
SELECT, however, did not show a smok-
ing-related benefit (placebo, 4.6% [223/
4863] vs vitamin E alone, 4.8% [232/
4853]). As with selenium in the NPC
study, vitamin E effects on prostate can-
cer incidence in the ATBC study could
have been due to chance findings in sec-
ondary analyses.

Selenium was not associated with sig-
nificant effects on cardiovascular events,
lung cancer, other cancers, or overall
mortality in SELECT. One safety con-
cern with selenium is a potential asso-
ciation with increased risk for type 2
diabetes mellitus, for which there are
mixed data from prior studies.28,29 A re-
cent analysis of the NPC study popu-
lation showed a significant increase in
type 2 diabetes mellitus (by self-
report and medical records), largely lim-
ited to the top tertile of plasma sele-
nium levels at baseline.30

In SELECT, a nonsignificant in-
crease in risk (RR, 1.07; P=.16) of dia-
betes mellitus compared with placebo
was observed in the selenium group but
not in the selenium ⫹ vitamin E group
(RR, 0.97; P=.62). Concerns about the
safety of vitamin E supplementation
arose during SELECT. One meta-
analysis31 found that vitamin E at doses
of at least 400 IU/d increased all-cause
mortality, and another study32 found evi-
dence that vitamin E supplementation,
alone or in combination with other an-
tioxidants, may increase mortality. Nei-
ther study is directly relevant to the doses
and population studied in SELECT;
many studies included in these meta-
analyses were in patients with serious dis-
ease, and the finding of increased mor-
tality was driven by studies using doses

SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

far higher than 400 IU/d. In more rel-
evant, placebo-controlled trials com-
pleted in healthy men and women, there
were no associations of vitamin E supple-
mentation with increased risks of either
cardiovascular disease or overall mor-
tality.33 SELECT results support the
safety of vitamin E at 400 IU/d in healthy
men, because there were no increases in
either cardiovascular disease or total mor-
tality in the vitamin E groups.

The 35 533 randomized men of
SELECT were needed because of the ro-
bust statistical design accommodating 4
study groups with 5 primary compari-
sons; this large trial population made
SELECT the largest cancer chemopre-
vention trial ever conducted to our
knowledge. African American men have
among the highest prostate cancer risks
in the world, and SELECT had the high-
est participation of African American
men (13%) of any large-scale cancer che-
moprevention trial to date.

The statistical rigor of the trial was
matched by the rigor of its implementa-
tion. Features of this implementation in-
cluded the SELECT Workbench, a se-
cure Web site administered by the
SELECT statistical center and used by
study-site staff and investigators. The
SELECT Workbench was used to ac-
cess participant and site-specific re-
ports, the study protocol, and a detailed
study manual and to submit data using
Web-based forms. Form submission in-
cluded detailed edit checks and a track-
ing system to identify all expected forms.
Training and monitoring consisted of
semi-annual workshops, quality assur-
ance audits at least once every 3 years,
and mentoring by trained statistical cen-
ter staff and experienced clinical re-
search associates. SELECT also main-
tained a public Web site initially designed
to recruit participants and later used to
promote participant adherence and to
keep SELECT in the public’s eye.20

Potential limitations of SELECT in-
clude that it did not test different for-
mulations or doses of selenium and vi-
tamin E and that it did not definitively
assess results in subgroups of men who
may have responded differently than did
the overall population. Because of ac-

tive annual screening (eg, PSA in 85%;
Table 3) and early detection (eg, 99.4%
stage T1 or T2; Table 3), SELECT could
not assess effects in reducing advanced
or fatal prostate cancer, which recent data
suggest may be a potential benefit of vi-
tamin E and selenium.18,27,34-36 SELECT
also could not assess intervention ef-
fects in a population deficient in vita-
min E, selenium, or both since our trial
population was well-nourished at base-
line, or in current smokers since they rep-
resented only 7.5% of the SELECT popu-
lation, a substantial difference from the
ATBC study in predominantly heavy
smokers.

Cancer chemoprevention is an im-
portant approach for reducing cancer
burden.37 Several randomized con-
trolled trials have demonstrated sig-
nificant cancer or premalignancy risk
reductions in the breast, colon-
rectum, prostate, and stomach.38-44 Pros-
tate cancer is a particularly attractive
target for chemoprevention because of
its clinical ubiquity, substantial treat-
ment-associated morbidity, and step-
wise molecular pathogenesis. In the
large-scale PCPT, which was reported
2 years after SELECT was activated, fi-
nasteride produced a 25% relative re-
duction in the 7-year period preva-
lence of prostate cancer (vs placebo),43
and recent data suggest that finaste-
ride reduces the risk of clinically sig-
nificant disease and may not induce
high-grade cancers despite initial con-
cerns to the contrary.45-49

CONCLUSION
In conclusion, SELECT has definitively
demonstrated that selenium, vitamin E,
or selenium ⫹ vitamin E (at the tested
doses and formulations) did not pre-
vent prostate cancer in the generally
healthy, heterogeneous population of
men in SELECT. These data under-
score the prudence that is needed in con-
sidering recommendations to use agents
for the prevention or control of disease
in the absence of convincing clinical trial
results. These findings also compel the
medical research community to con-
tinue the search for new, effective agents
for prostate cancer prevention.

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 49

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

Published Online: December 9, 2008 (doi:10.1001/
jama.2008.864).
Author Affiliations: Divisions of Cancer Medicine (Drs
Lippman and Karp) and Cancer Prevention and Popu-
lation Sciences (Drs Lippman and Cook), University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston; Glick-
man Urological and Kidney Institute and Taussig Can-
cer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio (Dr Klein);
Southwest Oncology Group Statistical Center, Seattle,
Washington (Dr Crowley and Mss P. Goodman, Hart-
line, Darke, and Arnold); Department of Pathology (Dr
Lucia) and Division of Urologic Oncology (Dr Crawford),
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver;
Departments of Urology (Dr Thompson) and Medicine/
Hematology and Medical Oncology (Dr Coltman), Uni-
versity of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio; Di-
vision of Cancer Prevention (Drs Ford, Parnes, and Mi-
nasian)andDivisionofCancerEpidemiologyandGenetics
(Drs Albanes and Taylor), National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland; Veterans Affairs Cooperative Stud-
ies Program and Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology
Research and Information Center, Boston VA Healthcare
Center,Boston,Massachusetts(DrGaziano);MooresCan-
cerCenter,LaJolla,California(DrParsons);UpstateCaro-
lina CCOP, Spartanburg, South Carolina (Dr Bearden);
Division of Hematology and Oncology, Swedish Cancer
Institute, Seattle, Washington (Dr G. Goodman); Alta-
mira Family Medicine, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico (Dr Clau-
dio); London Regional Cancer Program, London Health
SciencesCenter,London,Ontario,Canada(DrWinquist);
Department of Urologic Surgery, Duke University Medi-
cal Center, Durham, North Carolina (Dr Walther); De-
partmentofUrology,MayoClinic,Rochester,Minnesota
(DrLieber);DepartmentsofEpidemiology(DrKristal)and
Medicine and Cardiology (Dr Probstfield), University of
Washington, Seattle; Division of Cancer Prevention and
Control Research, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Cen-
ter, University of California, Los Angeles (Dr Ganz); Mail-
man School of Public Health, Columbia University, New
York, New York (Dr Santella); Center for Clinical Epide-
miology and Evaluation, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada (Mr Jagpal); Chao Family Compre-
hensive Cancer Center, University of California at Irvine,
Orange (Dr Meyskens); and Division of Hematology and
Oncology,UniversityofMichigan(DrBaker),andSouth-
west Oncology Group (Drs Baker and Coltman), Ann Ar-
bor, Michigan.
Author Contributions: Drs Lippman and Klein had full
access to all of the data in the study and take respon-
sibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy
of the data analysis. Both contributed equally to the
study.
Study concept and design: Lippman, Klein, P.
Goodman, Thompson, Ford, Parnes, Minasian,
Gaziano, Crawford, G. Goodman, Cook, Karp, Walther,
Lieber, Ganz, Santella, Albanes, Taylor, Probstfield,
Crowley, Meyskens, Coltman.
Acquisition of data: Klein, P. Goodman, Lucia, Hartline,
Parsons, Bearden, G. Goodman, Claudio, Winquist,
Cook, Lieber, Arnold, Jagpal, Crowley.
Analysis and interpretation of data: Lippman, Klein,
P. Goodman, Thompson, Ford, Parnes, Minasian,
Gaziano, Kristal, Darke, Arnold, Crowley, Baker,
Coltman.
Drafting of the manuscript: Lippman, Klein,
P. Goodman, Thompson, Minasian, Darke.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important in-
tellectual content: Lippman, Klein, P. Goodman, Lucia,
Thompson, Ford, Parnes, Minasian, Gaziano, Hartline,
Parsons, Bearden, Crawford, G. Goodman, Claudio,
Winquist, Cook, Karp, Walther, Lieber, Kristal, Arnold,
Ganz, Santella, Albanes, Taylor, Probstfield, Jagpal,
Crowley, Meyskens, Baker, Coltman.
Statistical analysis: P. Goodman, Darke, Arnold,
Crowley.
Obtained funding: Lippman, Coltman.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Lippman, Klein, P. Goodman, Lucia, Thompson, Ford,

Minasian, Hartline, Bearden, Crawford, G. Goodman,
Claudio, Cook, Lieber, Ganz, Santella, Albanes, Taylor,
Probstfield, Meyskens.
Study supervision: Lippman, Klein, Thompson, Ford,
Minasian, Gaziano, Hartline, G. Goodman, Karp, Lieber,
Probstfield, Crowley, Baker, Coltman.
Financial Disclosures: Dr Lucia reported serving as a con-
sultant for GlaxoSmithKline and Veridex, and being a
member of the Advisory Board for GenProbe. Dr Thomp-
son reported serving as a consultant for Veridex and Mis-
sion Pharmacal (with fees paid to University of Texas
Health Sciences Center, San Antonio). Dr Gaziano re-
ported receiving investigator-initiated research fund-
ing from Veroscience, Amgen, and BASF Corporation,
and research support in the form of study agents and
packaging from BASF Corporation, Wyeth Pharmaceu-
ticals, and DSM Nutritional Products Inc (formerly Roche
Vitamins); serving as a consultant or receiving hono-
raria from Bayer AG and Pfizer; and serving as an ex-
pert witness for Merck. Dr Meyskens reported being a
co-founder of Cancer Prevention Pharmaceuticals. No
other authors reported financial disclosures.
Funding/Support: This work was supported in part by
Public Health Service Cooperative Agreement grant
CA37429 awarded by the National Cancer Institute, Na-
tional Institutes of Health, Department of Health and
Human Services, and in part by the National Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (National In-
stitutes of Health). Study agents and packaging were
provided by Perrigo Company (Allegan, Michigan), Sab-
insa Corporation (Piscataway, New Jersey), Tishcon Cor-
poration (Westbury, New York), and DSM Nutritional
Products Inc (Parsipanny, New Jersey).
Role of the Sponsor: The National Cancer Institute was
involved in the design and conduct of the study, in
the analysis and interpretation of the data, and in the
preparation, review, and approval of the manuscript.
Active SELECT Clinical Sites With ⱖ100 Participants
as of October 23, 2008: San Diego, U of CA: J. Kellogg
Parsons, principal investigator (PI) [1743 men]; Up-
state Carolina CCOP: Jay Bearden III, PI (1201 men);
London Regional Cancer Program, London Health Sci-
ences Centre: Joseph L. Chin and Eric Winquist, PIs (981
men); University of Colorado: E. David Crawford, PI (964
men); Swedish Medical Ctr: Gary E. Goodman, PI (934
men); VAMC Jesse Brown: Thomas E. Lad, PI (749 men);
Harbor-UCLA: Rowan T. Chlebowski, PI (629 men); Le
Centre de Recherche: Yves Fradet, PI (628 men); Alta-
mira Family Med: Jaime Claudio, PI (610 men); Mayo,
Rochester: Michael M. Lieber, PI (606 men); Capital Re-
gion Prostate Centre: Gary Steinhoff, PI (543 men); Van-
couver Hospital: Mark FitzGerald, PI (423 men); Rush
University Medical Center: Steven K. Rothschild, PI (385
men); MD Anderson Cancer Center: Elise D. Cook, PI
(381 men); VAMC San Juan: Luis Baez, PI (359 men);
SUNY Stony Brook: Iris A. Granek, PI (358); Sher-
brooke University Hospital: Abdenour Nabid, PI (348
men); George Washington University: Richard J. Katz,
PI (342 men); William Beaumont Hospital: David A.
Decker, PI (321 men); Wilford Hall Medical Center: Kyle
J. Weld, PI (309 men); Cascadia Cancer Prevention at
St. Joseph Hospital: Frank E. James, PI (299 men); Day-
ton CCOP: Lawrence J. Litscher, PI (296 men); Grand
Rapids CCOP: Marianne K. Lange, PI (287 men); VAMC
Minneapolis: Timothy J. Wilt, PI (270 men); Carle Can-
cer Center CCOP: David L. Graham, PI (253 men); LDS
Hospital: Scott Chidester, PI (250 men); University of
Mississippi: Charles R. Pound, PI (238 men); Green-
ville CCOP: Jeffrey K. Giguere, PI (230 men); Metro-
Minnesota CCOP: Alice C. Shapiro, PI (229 men); VAMC
Cleveland: Donald R. Bodner, PI (227 men); Wichita
CCOP: Shaker R. Dakhil, PI (219 men); Arizona Can-
cer Center: Frederick R. Ahmann, PI (219 men); Marsh-
field Clinic: Matthias Weiss, PI (215 men); University
of Iowa Hospital: Richard D. Williams, PI (207 men);
Baptist Hospital East: Kerry Short, PI (202 men); Down-
state Medical Center: Richard J. Macchia, PI (197 men);
Kalamazoo CCOP: Raymond S. Lord III, PI (181 men);

Southern Nevada CCOP: John A. Ellerton, PI (173 men);
Sunnybrook Health Science Center: Laurence Klotz, MD,
PI (171 men); Missouri Baptist Medical Center: Paul K.
Schultz, PI (170 men); Geisinger Clinic: Albert M. Ber-
nath, PI (165 men); VAMC Kansas City: Peter J. Van
Veldhuizen Jr., PI (163 men); Orocovis Med Ctr: Jose
S. Aponte, PI (163 men); Sutter Health Cancer Re-
search Group-Eastern Division: Vincent Caggiano, PI
(160 men); VAMC Washington, DC: Steven H. Kras-
now, PI (154 men); Bay Area CCOP: Norman R. Co-
hen, PI (153 men); Sentara Cancer Institute: Robert W.
Given, PI (152 men); VAMC Fargo: William K. Becker,
PI (151 men); Medical College of Wisconsin: Robert
F. Donnell, PI (149 men); VAMC Houston: Teresa G.
Hayes, PI (146 men); Baptist Regional Cancer Insitute:
Neil Abramson, PI (136 men); Mount Sinai CCOP: Ro-
gerio C. Lilenbaum, PI (134 men); Methodist Hospi-
tals of Dallas: John V. Cox, PI (133 men); Miguel Sosa
Padilla: Miguel Sosa-Padilla, PI (133 men); Kaiser Perma-
nente: Nagendra R. Tirumali, PI (132 men); Duluth
CCOP: Steven A. Kuross, PI (131 men); Stormont-Vail
Health Care: Stanley J. Vogel, PI (130 men); Decatur
Memorial Hospital: James L. Wade III, PI (126 men);
VAMC Puget Sound: Daniel W. Lin, PI (124 men);
VAMC Boston: Mary T. Brophy, PI (122 men); Scott &
White CCOP: Scott Coffield, PI (119 men); Schiffler Can-
cer Center: Gregory S. Merrick, PI (116 men); Merit-
Care Hospital CCOP: Preston D. Steen, PI (115 men);
Gaston Memorial Hospital: Steven W. Yates, PI (114
men); VAMC Phoenix: James V. Felicetta, PI (113 men);
Lehigh Valley Hospital: Gregory R. Harper, PI (113 men);
Cancer Resource Ctr: Sushil S. Lacy, PI (112 men); Holy
Cross Hospital: Leonard J. Seigel, PI (112 men); Cleve-
land Clinic: Eric A. Klein, PI (111 men); Walter Reed
AMC: Rob Dean, PI (111 men); Kaiser Permanente-
GA: Joshua I. Barzilay, PI (110 men); Columbia River
CCOP: Keith S. Lanier, PI (110 men); Oregon Health &
Science University: Mark G. Garzotto,PI (110 men); H
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center: Julio M. Pow-Sang, PI (110
men); McGill University Health Center: Simon Tan-
guay, PI (110 men); Vanderbilt University: Michael S.
Cookson, PI (109 men); St Luke’s Mountain State Tu-
mor Institute: Thomas M. Beck, PI (107 men); Wash-
ington University: Robert L. Grubb III, PI (107 men);
VAMC Southern Arizona: Maria C. Bishop, PI (106 men);
Andres Grillasca: Luis Baez, PI (106 men); VAMC Hines:
Nirmala Bhoopalam, PI (102 men); University of Okla-
homa: Daniel J. Culkin, PI(102 men); Kaiser Permanente-
Oakland: Louis Fehrenbacher, PI (100 men); St Vin-
cent Hospital: Thomas J. Saphner, PI (100 men).
Intergroup Participants: Eastern Cooperative Oncol-
ogy Group: D. Karp (chief liaison); Cancer and Leu-
kemia Group B: P. Walther (chief liaison); North Cen-
tral Cancer Treatment Group: M. Lieber (chief liaison);
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group: F. Khuri (chief
liaison); and Veterans Affairs Cooperative Studies Pro-
gram: M. Gaziano (chief liaison).
SELECT Steering Committee: Gary E. Goodman, MD,
Philip R. Taylor, MD, ScD, Powel H. Brown, MD, PhD,
Paul Godley, MD, PhD, Charles Bennett, MD, PhD,
Michael M. Lieber, MD, Lewis Musgrove, Ellen Rich-
mond, MS, RN, Alan R. Kristal, DrPH, Julia E. Ver-
trees, PharmD, Regina M. Santella, PhD, M. Scott Lu-
cia, MD, Demetrius Albanes, MD, Patricia A. Ganz,
MD, Jeffrey L. Probstfield, MD, Neil E. Fleshner, MD,
MPH, Isaac J. Powell, MD, T. J. Jagpal, CCRP, Wil-
liam R. Markesbery, MD, William Christen, ScD, Pa-
tricia A. Cassano, PhD, M. Peter Lance, MD, Carolyn
J. Hoban, DSc, Marjorie A. Godfrey, Abbie L. Brown,
Dana B. Sparks, MAT, Elaine Armstrong, MS, Frank
L. Meyskens Jr, MD, Cathy Tangen, DrPH, Garnet L.
Anderson, PhD, Amy Darke, MS, Katie Arnold, MS,
Karen Anderson, Monica Yee, Scott M. Lippman, MD,
Eric A. Klein, MD, Phyllis J. Goodman, MS, Ian M.
Thompson, MD, Leslie G. Ford, MD, Howard L. Par-
nes, MD, J. Michael Gaziano, MD, MPH, Lori Mina-
sian, MD, Jo Ann L. Hartline, MPH, J. Kellogg Par-
sons, MD, MHS, James D. Bearden, III, MD, Jaime

50 JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 (Reprinted)

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018SELENIUM AND VITAMIN E FOR CANCER PREVENTION

Claudio, MD, Elise D. Cook, MD, Laurence H. Baker,
DO, John J. Crowley, PhD, Charles A. Coltman Jr, MD.
SELECT Committees and Subcommittees: Recruit-
ment and Adherence Committee: J. L. Probstfield
(chair); Minority and Medically Underserved Sub-
committee: E. D. Cook (chair); Health-related Qual-
ity of Life Committee: C. M. Moinpour and P. A. Ganz
(co-chairs); Pathology and Biomarkers Committee: M.
S. Lucia (chair); Molecular Epidemiology Commit-
tee: R. M. Santella (chair); Diet and Nutrition Com-
mittee: A. R. Kristal (chair); Site Coordinators Com-
mittee: T. J. Jagpal (chair).
Disclaimer: Dr Gaziano, a contributing editor for JAMA,
was not involved in the editorial review of or decision
to publish this article.
Additional Contributions: We thank the 35 533 men
and many principal investigators and clinical research as-
sociates at our 427 clinical sites, whose participation in
SELECT has written an important chapter in the history
of cancer prevention. We also thank the many person-
nel of the Southwest Oncology Group (the coordinat-
ing group of this Intergroup trial), whose tireless ef-
forts allowed SELECT to successfully complete the test
of its primary hypotheses. No compensation was re-
ceived.

REFERENCES

1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics,
2008. CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;58(2):71-96.
2. Harlan SR, Cooperberg MR, Elkin EP, et al. Time
trends and characteristics of men choosing watchful
waiting for initial treatment of localized prostate can-
cer: results from CaPSURE. J Urol. 2003;170(5):
1804-1807.
3. Potosky AL, Legler J, Albertsen PC, et al. Health out-
comes after prostatectomy or radiotherapy for prostate
cancer:resultsfromtheProstateCancerOutcomesStudy.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92(19):1582-1592.
4. Stanford JL, Feng Z, Hamilton AS, et al. Urinary and
sexual function after radical prostatectomy for clini-
cally localized prostate cancer: the Prostate Cancer Out-
comes Study. JAMA. 2000;283(3):354-360.
5. Cooperberg MR, Broering JM, Kantoff PW, Carroll
PR. Contemporary trends in low risk prostate cancer:
risk assessment and treatment. J Urol. 2007;178
(3 pt 2):S14-S19.
6. Hoffman RM, Gilliland FD, Penson DF, Stone SN, Hunt
WC, Potosky AL. Cross-sectional and longitudinal com-
parisons of health-related quality of life between pa-
tients with prostate carcinoma and matched controls.
Cancer. 2004;101(9):2011-2019.
7. The Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Pre-
vention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and beta
carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other can-
cers in male smokers. N Engl J Med. 1994;330(15):
1029-1035.
8. Clark LC, Combs GF Jr, Turnbull BW, et al; Nutri-
tional Prevention of Cancer Study Group. Effects of se-
lenium supplementation for cancer prevention in pa-
tients with carcinoma of the skin: a randomized controlled
trial. JAMA. 1996;276(24):1957-1963.
9. Duffield-Lillico AJ, Dalkin BL, Reid ME, et al; Nutri-
tional Prevention of Cancer Study Group. Selenium
supplementation, baseline plasma selenium status and
incidence of prostate cancer: an analysis of the com-
plete treatment period of the Nutritional Prevention of
Cancer Trial. BJU Int. 2003;91(7):608-612.
10. Heinonen OP, Albanes D, Virtamo J, et al. Pros-
tate cancer and supplementation with alpha-
tocopherol and beta-carotene: incidence and mortality
in a controlled trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90(6):
440-446.
11. Blot WJ, Li JY, Taylor PR, et al. Nutrition interven-
tion trials in Linxian, China: supplementation with spe-

cific vitamin/mineral combinations, cancer incidence, and
disease-specific mortality in the general population. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 1993;85(18):1483-1492.
12. Fleshner N, Fair WR, Huryk R, Heston WD. Vita-
min E inhibits the high-fat diet promoted growth of es-
tablished human prostate LNCaP tumors in nude mice.
J Urol. 1999;161(5):1651-1654.
13. Ip C, Thompson HJ, Zhu Z, Ganther HE. In vitro and
in vivo studies of methylseleninic acid: evidence that a
monomethylated selenium metabolite is critical for can-
cer chemoprevention. Cancer Res. 2000;60(11):
2882-2886.
14. Jiang C, Wang Z, Ganther H, Lu J. Caspases as key
executors of methyl selenium-induced apoptosis (anoi-
kis) of DU-145 prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2001;
61(7):3062-3070.
15. Menter DG, Sabichi AL, Lippman SM. Selenium ef-
fects on prostate cell growth. Cancer Epidemiol Bio-
markers Prev. 2000;9(11):1171-1182.
16. Redman C, Scott JA, Baines AT, et al. Inhibitory effect
of selenomethionine on the growth of three selected hu-
man tumor cell lines. Cancer Lett. 1998;125(1-2):
103-110.
17. Taylor PR, Albanes D. Selenium, vitamin E, and pros-
tate cancer–ready for prime time? J Natl Cancer Inst.
1998;90(16):1184-1185.
18. Yoshizawa K, Willett WC, Morris SJ, et al. Study of
prediagnostic selenium level in toenails and the risk of
advanced prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;
90(16):1219-1224.
19. Zhong W, Oberley TD. Redox-mediated effects of
selenium on apoptosis and cell cycle in the LNCaP hu-
man prostate cancer cell line. Cancer Res. 2001;
61(19):7071-7078.
20. Lippman SM, Goodman PJ, Klein EA, et al. Design-
ing the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial
(SELECT). J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97(2):94-102.
21. Current good manufacturing practice regulations,
21 CFR §210, 211.
22. Duffield-Lillico AJ, Reid ME, Turnbull BW, et al. Base-
line characteristics and the effect of selenium supple-
mentation on cancer incidence in a randomized clinical
trial: a summary report of the Nutritional Prevention of
Cancer Trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2002;
11(7):630-639.
23. LonnE,BoschJ,YusufS,etal;HOPEandHOPE-TOO
Trial Investigators. Effects of long-term vitamin E supple-
mentation on cardiovascular events and cancer: a ran-
domized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;293(11):1338-
1347.
24. Venkateswaran V, Fleshner NE, Klotz LH. Modu-
lation of cell proliferation and cell cycle regulators by vi-
tamin E in human prostate carcinoma cell lines. J Urol.
2002;168(4 pt 1):1578-1582.
25. Traber MG. How much vitamin E? just enough! Am
J Clin Nutr. 2006;84(5):959-960.
26. Weinstein SJ, Wright ME, Pietinen P, et al. Serum
alpha-tocopherol and gamma-tocopherol in relation to
prostate cancer risk in a prospective study. J Natl Can-
cer Inst. 2005;97(5):396-399.
27. Kirsh VA, Hayes RB, Mayne ST, et al; PLCO Trial.
Supplemental and dietary vitamin E, beta-carotene, and
vitamin C intakes and prostate cancer risk. J Natl Can-
cer Inst. 2006;98(4):245-254.
28. Bleys J, Navas-Acien A, Guallar E. Serum selenium
and diabetes in U.S. adults. Diabetes Care. 2007;
30(4):829-834.
29. Rajpathak S, Rimm E, Morris JS, Hu F. Toenail se-
lenium and cardiovascular disease in men with diabetes.
J Am Coll Nutr. 2005;24(4):250-256.
30. Stranges S, Marshall JR, Natarajan R, et al. Effects
of long-term selenium supplementation on the inci-
dence of type 2 diabetes: a randomized trial. Ann In-
tern Med. 2007;147(4):217-223.
31. Miller ER III, Pastor-Barriuso R, Dalal D, Riemersma
RA, Appel LJ, Guallar E. Meta-analysis: high-dosage vi-

tamin E supplementation may increase all-cause
mortality. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142(1):37-46.
32. Bjelakovic G, Nikolova D, Gluud LL, Simonetti RG,
Gluud C. Mortality in randomized trials of antioxidant
supplements for primary and secondary prevention: sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2007;
297(8):842-857.
33. Sesso HD, Buring JE, Christen WG, et al. Vitamins
E and C in the prevention of cardiovascular disease in
men: the Physicians’ Health Study II randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA. 2008;300(18):2123-2133.
34. Lee IM, Gaziano JM, Buring JE. Vitamin E in the pre-
vention of prostate cancer: where are we today? J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2006;98(4):225-227.
35. Li H, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci EL, et al. A pro-
spective study of plasma selenium levels and prostate
cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96(9):696-703.
36. Taylor PR, Parnes HL, Lippman SM. Science peels
the onion of selenium effects on prostate carcinogenesis.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004;96(9):645-647.
37. Lippman SM, Lee JJ, Sabichi AL. Cancer chemo-
prevention: progress and promise. J Natl Cancer Inst.
1998;90(20):1514-1528.
38. Bertagnolli MM, Eagle CJ, Zauber AG, et al; APC
Study Investigators. Celecoxib for the prevention of spo-
radic colorectal adenomas. N Engl J Med. 2006;
355(9):873-884.
39. Fisher B, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al. Ta-
moxifen for prevention of breast cancer: report of the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1
study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1998;90(18):1371-1388.
40. Flossmann E, Rothwell PM; British Doctors Aspirin
Trial and the UK-TIA Aspirin Trial. Effect of aspirin on
long-term risk of colorectal cancer: consistent evi-
dence from randomised and observational studies.
Lancet. 2007;369(9573):1603-1613.
41. Fukase K, Kato M, Kikuchi S, et al; Japan Gast Study
Group. Effect of eradication of Helicobacter pylori on
incidence of metachronous gastric carcinoma after en-
doscopic resection of early gastric cancer: an open-
label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;
372(9636):392-397.
42. Meyskens FL, McLaren CE, Pelot D, et al. Difluo-
romethylornithine plus sulindac for the prevention of spo-
radic colorectal adenomas: a randomized placebo-
controlled, double-blind trial. Cancer Prev Res. 2008;
1:9-11.
43. Thompson IM, Goodman PJ, Tangen CM, et al. The
influence of finasteride on the development of pros-
tate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(3):215-224.
44. Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, et al; Na-
tionalSurgicalAdjuvantBreastandBowelProject(NSABP).
Effects of tamoxifen vs raloxifene on the risk of devel-
opinginvasivebreastcancerandotherdiseaseoutcomes:
the NSABP Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR)
P-2 trial. JAMA. 2006;295(23):2727-2741.
45. Scardino PT. The prevention of prostate cancer: the
dilemma continues. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(3):
297-299.
46. Logothetis CJ, Schellhammer PF. High-grade pros-
tate cancer and the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial.
Cancer Prev Res. 2008;1(3):151-152.
47. Lucia MS, Darke AK, Goodman PJ, et al. Patho-
logic characteristics of cancers detected in the Prostate
Cancer Prevention Trial: implications for prostate can-
cer detection and chemoprevention. Cancer Prev Res.
2008;1(3):167-173.
48. Lucia MS, Epstein JI, Goodman PJ, et al. Finaste-
ride and high-grade prostate cancer in the Prostate Can-
cer Prevention Trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99
(18):1375-1383.
49. Redman MW, Tangen CM, Goodman PJ, Lucia MS,
Coltman CA Jr, Thompson IM. Finasteride does not in-
crease the risk of high-grade prostate cancer: a bias-
adjusted modeling approach. Cancer Prev Res. 2008;
1(3):174-181.

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, January 7, 2009—Vol 301, No. 1 51

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018630

Vol. 11, 630 – 639, July 2002

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

Baseline Characteristics and the Effect of Selenium Supplementation on
Cancer Incidence in a Randomized Clinical Trial: A Summary Report

of the Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial1

Anna J. Duffield-Lillico, Mary E. Reid,
Bruce W. Turnbull, Gerald F. Combs, Jr.,
Elizabeth H. Slate, Lori A. Fischbach,
James R. Marshall,2 and Larry C. Clark3 for the
Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Study Group
Arizona Cancer Center [A. J. D-L., M. E. R., J. R. M., L. C. C.] and Arizona
College of Public Health [M. E. R., J. R. M.], University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona 85724; School of Operations Research and Industrial Engineering
[B. W. T.] and Division of Nutritional Sciences [G. F. C.], Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853; School of Public Health, University of Texas-
Houston Health Science Center, Dallas, Texas 75390 [L. A. F.]; and
Department of Biometry and Epidemiology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425 [E. H. S.]

Abstract
The Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial was a
randomized, clinical trial designed to evaluate the efficacy
of selenium as selenized yeast (200 ␮g daily) in
preventing the recurrence of nonmelanoma skin cancer
among 1312 residents of the Eastern United States.
Original secondary analyses through December 31, 1993
showed striking inverse associations between treatment
and the incidence of total [hazard ratio (HR) ⴝ 0.61,
95% confidence interval (CI) ⴝ 0.46 – 0.82], lung,
prostate, and colorectal cancer and total cancer mortality.
This report presents results through February 1, 1996,
the end of blinded treatment. Effect modification by
baseline characteristics is also evaluated. The effects of
treatment overall and within subgroups of baseline age,
gender, smoking status, and plasma selenium were
examined using incidence rate ratios and Cox
proportional hazards models. Selenium supplementation
reduced total (HR ⴝ 0.75, 95% CI ⴝ 0.58 – 0.97) and
prostate (HR ⴝ 0.48, 95% CI ⴝ 0.28 – 0.80) cancer
incidence but was not significantly associated with lung
(HR ⴝ 0.74, 95% CI ⴝ 0.44 –1.24) and colorectal (HR ⴝ
0.46, 95% CI ⴝ 0.21–1.02) cancer incidence. The effects
of treatment on other site-specific cancers are also
described. The protective effect of selenium was confined
to males (HR ⴝ 0.67, 95% CI ⴝ 0.50 – 0.89) and was
most pronounced in former smokers. Participants with

Received 11/2/01; revised 4/1/02; accepted 4/23/02.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
1 Supported in part by National Cancer Center Grant RO1 CA49764 from
the NIH.
2 To whom requests for reprints should be addressed, at Arizona Cancer Center,
Room 2964, P. O. Box 245024, Tucson, AZ 85724-5024. Phone: (520) 626-4768;
Fax: (520) 626-5348; E-mail: jrmarshall@azcc.arizona.edu.
3 Deceased.

baseline plasma selenium concentrations in the lowest two
tertiles (<121.6 ng/ml) experienced reductions in total
cancer incidence, whereas those in the highest tertile
showed an elevated incidence (HR ⴝ 1.20, 95% CI ⴝ
0.77–1.86). The Nutritional Prevention of Cancer trial
continues to show a protective effect of selenium on
cancer incidence, although not all site-specific cancers
exhibited a reduction in incidence. This treatment effect
was restricted to males and to those with lower baseline
plasma selenium concentrations.

Introduction
The NPC4 Trial (1) contributed substantially to the evidence
supporting selenium as a chemopreventive agent. These results,
which have been cited in the medical literature over 400 times
in the last 5 years, have also received considerable public
attention. The study was originally designed to test the efficacy
of selenium supplementation in preventing NMSC recurrence
in men and women with a history of two or more BCCs or one
SCC of the skin. The hypothesis for this trial was supported by
Clark’s observation that populations in the southeastern United
States, a region with soil selenium concentrations lower than
those of the rest of the country, showed elevated NMSC rates
(2). Thus, Clark and colleagues initiated a randomized clinical
trial of selenium supplementation for preventing the recurrence
of NMSC in this high-risk population. The original trial results
failed to confirm that selenium supplementation prevented
NMSC recurrence. Indeed, the incidence of new BCCs was
increased by a nonsignificant 10% among selenium-supple-
mented individuals, whereas the incidence of new SCCs was
increased by an again nonsignificant 14%.

Nevertheless, early in the intervention, an unexpected def-
icit of other cancer and mortality endpoints among selenium-
supplemented participants became apparent, so that in 1993,
endpoints for the trial were expanded to include lung, prostate,
and colorectal cancer, as well as total cancer incidence and total
cancer mortality. In 1994, the Safety Monitoring and Advisory
Committee recommended the trial be unblinded and results
published. The National Cancer Institute audited the study in
May 1995, and, with the National Cancer Institute’s approval,
the blinded phase of patient treatment and follow-up ended in
February 1996. At this time, all participants were informed of
their treatment status, given the opportunity to take selenium
supplements, and reconsented to participate in the Open-Label
Phase of this trial.

4 The abbreviations used are: NPC, Nutritional Prevention of Cancer; HR, hazard
ratio; CI, confidence interval; NMSC, nonmelanoma skin cancer; BCC, basal cell
carcinoma; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma; BMI, body mass index; PY, person-
year(s); RR, relative risk; PHS, Physicians’ Health Study.

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

631

The apparent effects of selenium supplementation on can-
cer incidence through the end of 1993 (representing an average
of 6.4 years of subject follow-up) were striking. The original
report indicated that selenium supplementation led to a mar-
ginally statistically significant decrease in (a) lung cancer in-
cidence (HR ⫽ 0.56, 95% CI ⫽ 0.0.31–1.01, P ⫽ 0.05), (b)
statistically significant decreases in prostate cancer incidence
(HR ⫽ 0.35, 95% CI ⫽ 0.18 – 0.65, P ⫽ 0.001), (c) colorectal
cancer incidence (HR ⫽ 0.39, 95% CI ⫽ 0.17– 0.90, P ⫽ 0.03),
(d) total cancer incidence (HR ⫽ 0.61, 95% CI ⫽ 0.46 – 0.82,
P ⬍ 0.001), and (e) total cancer mortality (HR ⫽ 0.48, 95%
CI ⫽ 0.0.31– 0.76, P ⫽ 0.001).

The current report adds considerably to the statistical
precision of this trial by extending the previously reported
results (September 15, 1983 to December 31, 1993) through the
entire blinded phase of the trial (September 15 1983 to February
1, 1996). With total cancer incidence as the primary end point,
mean subject follow-up time was enhanced by 1 year to an
average of 7.4 years. Overall, selenium supplementation con-
tinued to reduce the incidence of total cancer and prostate,
colorectal, and lung cancers, although the reduction in inci-
dence of the latter two cancers was not statistically significant.
Not all site-specific cancers presented in this report exhibited a
reduction in risk with selenium supplementation. In addition,
this analysis describes the effect of selenium supplementation
on total cancer incidence within subgroups defined by key
baseline characteristics including age, gender, smoking status,
and plasma selenium. The protective effect of selenium sup-
plementation on total cancer incidence was most prominent in
males and those with lower baseline plasma selenium concen-
trations. Although the examination of treatment effects in sub-
group analyses is fraught with potential limitations, and the
modest sample size limits statistical power and interpretation,
subgroup analyses in this important dataset provide an oppor-
tunity to evaluate trends in the data, which may further our
understanding of the effectiveness of selenium as a chemopre-
ventive agent.

Materials and Methods
The protocol for the NPC study is described in the original
report by Clark et al. (1). Briefly, this study was a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial conducted among 1312
participants living in the Eastern United States. Participants had
a history of two or more BCCs or one SCC of the skin, with one
of these occurring within the year prior to randomization.
Participants had a life expectancy of at least 5 years and had had
no internal malignancies treated within the previous 5 years.
Exclusion criteria included a history of significant liver or
kidney disorders. Although recruitment was gender neutral,
approximately three-quarters of the participants were male.

This study was conducted in dermatology clinics in seven
cities located in low-selenium areas of the United States, including
Augusta, Georgia; Macon, Georgia; Columbia, South Carolina;
Miami, Florida; Wilson, North Carolina; Greenville, North Caro-
lina; and Newington, Connecticut. Recruitment began on Septem-
ber 15, 1983 and continued each year through 1991. Participants
were randomized in a double-blinded fashion to the experimental
treatment or an identical placebo. Experimental participants were
treated with 200 ␮g of selenium supplied in a 0.5-g high-selenium
baker’s yeast tablet provided by Nutrition 21 (La Jolla, CA)
through 1995 and by Cypress Systems (Fresno, CA) thereafter.
The selenium content of each batch of pills was determined in the
laboratories of Dr. G. F. Combs, Jr. and of Dr. I. S. Palmer (South
Dakota State University, Brookings, SD) using the diaminonaptha-

lene-fluorometric procedure after nitric-perchloric acid digestion
(3). Plasma selenium concentration was determined in the labora-
tory of Dr. G. F. Combs, Jr. by automated electrothermal atomic
absorption spectrophotometry (Perkin-Elmer 3030; Perkin-Elmer
Corp., Norwalk, CT) equipped with an electrodeless discharge
lamp and automatic Zeeman-effect background correction. Quality
control included multiple aliquots of human plasma as external
control samples. A coefficient of variation of ⬍7% (for duplicate
analyses) was the criterion for acceptance (4).

At the baseline interview, sociodemographic and behav-
ioral variables including education (number of years of school-
ing, 0 –18), occupation (classified according to NIH standards),
numbers of years on farm, use of vitamin supplements, use of
sunscreen, cancer screening information, number of alcoholic
drinks/day, smoking status (current, former, never), number of
cigarettes smoked/day, and years of smoking were collected
from the participants. In addition, a thorough medical and
medication history was obtained at baseline and updated at each
biannual follow-up visit. Patient medical records from each
clinic were reviewed periodically to ascertain information from
both study and nonstudy visits to ensure the completeness and
accuracy of the information. For participants who became in-
active, annual contact was attempted using the National Death
Index and ChoicePoint (formerly Equifax Inc.) to determine
vital status and identify diagnoses of new illnesses. In the event
of reports of new illnesses or medical procedures, research
nurses requested medical, surgical, and pathology records from
physicians in hospitals for documentation. Searches for addi-
tional cases of cancer were also performed at each state tumor
registry in which a clinic site was located. An oncologist or
appropriate medical specialist reviewed every cancer record
and confirmed the diagnosis. A nosologist coded the death
certificates. Review and coding of all records occurred in a
blinded manner.

At the end of the blinded period of treatment on February
2, 1996, 35.9% of participants were still on treatment, 16.6%
were off treatment but still having routine dermatological ex-
aminations, 22.1% of participants were censored for dermato-
logical endpoints but not other endpoints, and 24.8% had died.
After a total of 9301 PY of follow-up, no participants were lost
to vital follow-up, and only seven subjects (three in the sele-
nium group and four in the placebo group) declined to provide
additional illness information. Participant-reported compliance
indicated that 79.3% of participants (80.3% in the placebo
group and 78.4% in the selenium group) missed taking a pill
less than twice a month.

Sixty-two participants (including two cancer cases in each
treatment group) whose initial blood draws were drawn ⬎4
days after the randomization date were excluded from the
analysis. Thus, all statistical analyses were based on data from
those 1250 participants with initial blood draws within 4 days
of randomization. Results obtained from the total cohort of
1312 participants and the subsample of 1250 participants with
valid baseline selenium values (621 participants in the selenium
group and 629 participants in the placebo group) showed no
significant differences when continuous (age, BMI, and plasma
selenium concentrations) and categorical (gender and smoking
status) baseline variables were compared using t tests and ␹2
tests, respectively. In addition, no significant differences in
incidence data from the total cohort and subsample of the NPC
participants were detected.

Within the subsample of 1250 NPC participants, t tests and
␹2 tests were conducted to determine any differences in the
distribution of these baseline variables between treatment
groups. PY of follow-up were calculated among the subsample

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

632

Se Supplementation and Cancer Incidence: The NPC Trial

Table 1 Baseline characteristics of participants by treatment group

Characteristic

Participants randomized (no.)
Age (yrs) (mean ⫾ SD)
Gender (% male)
BMI (kg/m2) (mean ⫾ SD)
Smoking status (%)

Never
Former
Current

Plasma selenium (ng/ml)

Mean ⫾ SD
33rd centile
50th centile
66th centile

Selenium

621

63.4 ⫾ 10.2

74

25.6 ⫾ 3.9

34
39
27

Placebo

629

63.0 ⫾ 9.9

75

25.5 ⫾ 4.1

30
40
30

114.4 ⫾ 22.6

114.0 ⫾ 21.5

105.6
113.6
122.4

104.8
113.2
121.2

of 1250 subjects. For subjects without cancer, PY were com-
puted using the date of randomization as the start date, and the
earlier of February 1, 1996 or the date of death as the closing
date. PY of follow-up for cancer cases were calculated through
the date of the first category-specific, postrandomization pri-
mary cancer diagnosis (excluding NMSC) documented in pa-
thology, surgery, or medical reports. Participants with multiple
cancers at different sites were counted only once in the analysis
of total cancer incidence and once in each site-specific analysis
in which an incident cancer was diagnosed.

Total cancer incidence data between treatment groups
were analyzed statistically through the comparison of Nelson-
Aalen (5) cumulative hazard function estimates calculated at
different time points of the trial and the two-sided log-rank test.
RRs, calculated using the ratio of the incidence density for the
treatment groups, and the corresponding 95% CIs for site-
specific and total cancer incidence and total cancer mortality
were calculated. Ps were derived from log-rank tests. Support-
ing analyses included the calculation of HRs and 95% CIs using
the Cox proportional hazards model, which allowed adjustment
for age at baseline (continuous variable), gender, and smoking
status (never, former, current) as covariates when appropriate.
Throughout this report, results of both the incidence rate ratio
and Cox proportional hazards models will be displayed in the
tables, although only the latter will be presented in the text.
Among the 1250 participants with baseline blood draws within
4 days of randomization, the effect of selenium supplementa-
tion on total cancer incidence was assessed within subgroups
determined by baseline characteristics. Effect modification by
median age (65 years), gender, and smoking status (never,
former, current) at randomization was tested using the Mantel-
Haenszel test for heterogeneity in the unadjusted models. The
statistical significance of the interaction between each baseline
characteristic and treatment group, adjusted for other important
baseline variables, was tested in a Cox proportional hazards
model that included this interaction and the corresponding main
effect terms, in addition to the variables for the adjustment.

The statistical association between total cancer incidence
and concentrations of baseline plasma selenium was also de-
termined. Based on the distribution among the 1250 partici-
pants with valid values, baseline plasma selenium concentra-
tions were divided by the median (ⱕ113.4 ng/ml and ⬎113.4
ng/ml) and by tertiles (ⱕ105.2 ng/ml, 105.3–121.6 ng/ml, and
⬎121.6 ng/ml). The effect of selenium supplementation on
total cancer incidence was assessed within these subgroups of
baseline plasma selenium with the same techniques used for the
analyses within subgroups of baseline age, gender, and smok-
ing status.

Fig. 1. Cumulative incidence of total cancer in the NPC Trial by treatment
group.

HRs, 95% CIs, and tests of statistical significance adjusted
for age, gender, and smoking status at baseline were calculated
to determine the association between baseline plasma selenium
concentrations and the subsequent development of total cancer,
according to treatment group. To confirm the consistency of
this association, three different measures of baseline plasma
selenium were used: (a) as a continuous variable (each unit ⫽
10 ng/ml); (b) by the median value; and (c) by tertiles. The
subgroups below the median or in the first tertile of baseline
plasma selenium were used as the referent groups in their
respective models. Tests for trends in the effects of baseline
plasma selenium across tertiles were conducted using the tertile
number as a continuous term in Cox proportional hazards
models.

All techniques were implemented using STATA 6.0 (6).

Results
Selected baseline characteristics of participants, by treatment
group, are displayed in Table 1. The treatment groups were well
balanced for all evaluated baseline characteristics. At random-
ization, the mean age was 63.4 years among participants ran-
domized to selenium and 63.0 years among those randomized
to placebo. The mean BMI (kg/m2) and proportions of current,
never, and former smokers at baseline did not vary appreciably
across treatment groups. The mean baseline plasma selenium
concentrations were 114.4 and 114.0 ng/ml for selenium- and
placebo-supplemented individuals, respectively. The distribu-
tions of baseline plasma selenium by median and tertile were
almost identical across treatment groups.

At unblinding (February 1, 1996), the trial had 9301 PY of
follow-up (4694 and 4607 years for the selenium and placebo
groups, respectively). Throughout this period, 242 cases of
incident cancer were diagnosed. Of these, 105 occurred in the
selenium-supplemented group, and 137 occurred in the place-
bo-supplemented group. Total cancer cumulative incidence
curves over time since randomization are shown in Fig. 1.
Cumulative incidence was lower among those receiving sele-
nium than among those receiving placebo, throughout the entire
trial. At the end of the study, the selenium group showed a
significantly lower incidence (25%) of total cancer (HR ⫽ 0.75,
95% CI ⫽ 0.58 – 0.97, P ⫽ 0.03) than the placebo group (Table
2). Table 2 also shows the RR and HR (HR ⫽ 0.61, 95% CI ⫽
0.46 – 0.82, P ⬍ 0.001) estimates for total cancer from the
1983–1993 analysis published in 1996 (1). The overall effect of

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

633

Table 2 Total cancer incidence by treatment group and follow-up period

Follow-up period

1983 to Feb. 1, 1996
1983 to Dec. 31, 1993

Cases

Se

105
77

Placebo

137
119

RR

0.75
0.63

Unadjusteda

95% CI

0.58–0.98
0.47–0.85

P

0.03
0.001

HR

0.75
0.61

Adjustedb

95% CI

0.58–0.97
0.46–0.82

P

0.03
⬍0.001

a RR and 95% CI were derived from incidence rate ratios, Ps were derived from log-rank tests.
b 95% CI and Ps were derived from the Cox proportional hazards model adjusted for age (continuous), gender, and smoking (never, former, current) at randomization.

Cancer

All sites
Prostate
Lung
Colorectal
Other carcinomas
Other noncarcinomas
Esophageal
Melanoma
Bladder
Breast
Head and neck
Lymphoma and leukemia
Cancer mortality, all sites

Table 3 Site-specific cancer incidence by treatment group (through February 1, 1996)

Cases

Placebo

137
42
35
19
9
5
5
9
8
6
7
6
66

Se

105
22
25
9
6
3
2
11
10
11
9
8
40

RR

0.75
0.51
0.70
0.46
0.66
0.59
0.39
1.21
1.24
1.82
1.27
1.32
0.59

Unadjusteda

95% CI

0.58–0.98
0.29–0.87
0.40–1.21
0.19–1.08
0.19–2.07
0.09–3.04
0.04–2.41
0.46–3.30
0.44–3.61
0.62–6.01
0.42–4.01
0.40–4.61
0.39–0.89

P

0.03
0.009
0.18
0.055
0.44
0.50
0.28
0.68
0.66
0.24
0.65
0.62
0.008

HR

0.75
0.48
0.74
0.46
0.67
0.59
0.40
1.18
1.28
1.89
1.27
1.25
0.59

Adjustedb

95% CI

0.58–0.97
0.28–0.80
0.44–1.24
0.21–1.02
0.24–1.88
0.14–2.47
0.08–2.07
0.49–2.85
0.50–3.25
0.69–5.14
0.47–3.42
0.43–3.61
0.39–0.87

P

0.03
0.005
0.26
0.057
0.44
0.47
0.28
0.71
0.60
0.21
0.63
0.68
0.008

a RR and 95% CI were derived from incidence rate ratios, and Ps were derived from log-rank tests.
b 95% CI and Ps were derived from the Cox proportional hazards model adjusted for age (continuous), gender, and smoking (never, former, current) at randomization.

selenium is diminished slightly by the inclusion of 25 months
of additional follow-up.

Analyses by cancer site are displayed in Table 3. The most
frequent site-specific cancer in this cohort was prostate cancer
(n ⫽ 64), closely followed by lung cancer (n ⫽ 60) and then by
colorectal cancer (n ⫽ 28). Prostate cancer incidence was
significantly reduced by selenium supplementation (HR ⫽
0.48, 95% CI ⫽ 0.28 – 0.80, P ⫽ 0.005); lung cancer incidence
showed a nonsignificant 26% reduction (HR ⫽ 0.74, 95% CI ⫽
0.44 –1.24, P ⫽ 0.26), and colorectal cancer incidence exhib-
ited a marginally significant reduction of 54% (HR ⫽ 0.46,
95% CI ⫽ 0.21–1.02, P ⫽ 0.057). Selenium-supplemented
individuals experienced nonsignificant reductions in incidence
for other carcinomas (thyroid, pancreatic, gastric, renal, endo-
metrial, mesothelioma, and unknown primary), other noncarci-
nomas (glioblastoma, Kaposi’s sarcoma, astrocytoma, histiocy-
toma, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, and sarcoma), and cancer
of the esophagus. Conversely, participants supplemented with
selenium showed nonsignificantly increased incidence of five
of the other specific cancers, including melanoma, bladder
cancer, breast cancer, head and neck cancer, lymphoma, and
leukemia, compared with those supplemented with placebo
(Table 3).

Table 3 also shows total cancer mortality by treatment
group. One hundred and six cancer deaths occurred throughout
the trial. Of these, 40 were among selenium-supplemented
individuals, and 66 were among placebo-supplemented partic-
ipants (HR ⫽ 0.59, 95% CI ⫽ 0.39 – 0.87, P ⫽ 0.008).

The effects of selenium supplementation on total cancer
incidence within subgroups defined by baseline cancer risk
factors are shown in Table 4. There was no evidence that the
effect of selenium supplementation was related to age at base-
line. The adjusted treatment effects for males and females were
0.67 (95% CI ⫽ 0.50 – 0.89, P ⫽ 0.005) and 1.20 (95% CI ⫽

0.66 –2.20, P ⫽ 0.55), respectively. Thus, any protective treat-
ment effect in the study was confined to males. Multivariate
adjustment for age and smoking status did not alter the treat-
ment effects within either gender subgroup. Ps for heterogene-
ity and interaction were not statistically significant.

Table 4 also presents subgroup analysis by baseline cigarette
smoking status. Selenium supplementation decreased unadjusted
total cancer incidence, although not significantly so, for each
category of smoking status (never, former, and current smokers).
Similar treatment effects were observed in never smokers (HR ⫽
0.81, 95% CI 0.47–1.41, P ⫽ 0.46) and current smokers
(HR ⫽ 0.86, 95% CI 0.56–1.31, P ⫽ 0.47). Former smokers
experienced a statistically significant treatment benefit (HR ⫽
0.66, 95% CI ⫽ 0.44–0.97, p ⫽ 0.04). Nevertheless, Ps for
heterogeneity and interaction were not statistically significant.

The report by Clark et al. (7), which described a more
extensive analysis of incident prostate cancer in the 1983–1993
dataset, indicated that the effect of selenium supplementation
was strongest among participants with the lowest baseline
plasma selenium concentrations (RR ⫽ 0.08, P ⫽ 0.002 for
individuals with baseline plasma selenium concentrations
⬍106.4 ng/ml). We investigated the association between sele-
nium supplementation and the incidence of total cancer across
strata of baseline plasma selenium (Table 5). A statistically
significant inverse association between selenium supplementa-
tion and total cancer incidence was apparent in participants
below the median baseline selenium (HR ⫽ 0.62, 95% CI ⫽
0.43– 0.90, P ⫽ 0.01), whereas those above the median value at
baseline experienced a nonsignificant reduction in incidence
(HR ⫽ 0.91, 95% CI ⫽ 0.63–1.30, P ⫽ 0.60). However, a
significant interaction between treatment group and baseline
plasma selenium divided by the median concentration was not
apparent (P for interaction ⫽ 0.14).

Table 5 shows that selenium supplementation led to a

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

634

Se Supplementation and Cancer Incidence: The NPC Trial

Table 4 Total cancer incidence by treatment group and subgroups defined by baseline characteristics

Cases

Unadjusteda

Adjustedb

Placebo

RR

95% CI

P

P, M-H

HR

95% CI

P

P, intc

64
73

20
117

26
61
50

0.75
0.74

1.14
0.68

0.85
0.67
0.86

0.50–1.11
0.51–1.05

0.60–2.20
0.51–0.92

0.47–1.53
0.44–1.01
0.55–1.33

0.13
0.08

0.66
0.008

0.57
0.05
0.47

0.95

0.13

0.65

0.76
0.75

1.20
0.67

0.81
0.66
0.86

0.52–1.12d
0.54–1.07d

0.66–2.20e
0.50–0.89e

0.47–1.41f
0.44–0.97f
0.56–1.31f

0.17
0.11

0.55
0.005

0.46
0.04
0.47

0.98

0.14

0.76

Age (yrs)

ⱕ65
⬎65
Gender

Female
Male

Smoking status

Never
Former
Current

Se

46
59

23
82

25
42
38

a RR and 95% CI were derived from incidence rate ratios; Ps were derived from log-rank (P) test and Mantel-Haenszel (P, M-H) test for heterogeneity.
b HR, 95% CI, and Ps from the Cox proportional hazards model: d, adjusted for gender and smoking status (never, former, current) at baseline; e, adjusted for age
(continuous) and smoking status (never, former, current) at baseline; and f, adjusted for age (continuous) and gender at baseline.
c Ps for treatment group characteristic interaction is for the (treatment group ⫻ factor) cross-product term in separate Cox proportional hazards models.

Baseline plasma

Se

By median

ⱕ113.4 (ng/ml)
⬎113.4 (ng/ml)

By tertile

ⱕ105.2 (ng/ml)
105.3–121.6
⬎121.6 (ng/ml)

Se

46
59

27
34
44

Table 5 Total cancer incidence by treatment group and baseline plasma selenium

Cases

Incidencea

Unadjustedb

Adjustedc

Placebo

Se

Placebo

RR

95% CI

P

P, M-H

HR

95% CI

P

P, intd

73
64

54
46
37

1.93
2.13

1.71
2.13
2.91

3.12
2.82

3.44
3.03
2.44

0.62
0.90

0.50
0.70
1.19

0.42–0.91
0.62–1.31

0.30–0.80
0.44–1.12
0.75–1.90

0.01
0.57

0.002
0.12
0.43

0.15

0.02

0.62
0.91

0.51
0.70
1.20

0.43–0.90
0.63–1.30

0.32–0.81
0.44–1.09
0.77–1.86

0.01
0.60

0.005
0.11
0.43

0.14

0.007

a Annual cumulative incidence per 100 PY.
b RR and 95% CI were derived from incidence rate ratios; Ps were derived from log-rank (P) test and Mantel-Haenszel (P, M-H) test for heterogeneity.
c HR, 95% CI, and P values from the Cox proportional hazards models adjusted for age (continuous), gender, and smoking status (never, former, current) at baseline.
d P for treatment group characteristic interaction is for the (treatment group ⫻ factor) cross-product term in separate Cox proportional hazards models.

Table 6 Total cancer incidence according to baseline plasma selenium, by treatment group

Baseline plasma Se

Continuous

Per 10 ng/ml

By median

ⱕ113.4 ng/ml
⬎113.4 ng/ml

By tertile

ⱕ105.2 ng/ml
105.2–121.6 ng/ml
⬎121.6 ng/ml

HR

1.12

1.00
1.45

1.00
1.29
1.88

Sea

95% CI

P

P, trendb

1.03–1.22

0.005

0.98–2.15

0.06

0.78–2.15
1.15–3.05

0.32
0.01

0.01

HR

0.97

1.00
0.95

1.00
0.88
0.76

Placeboa

95% CI

P

P, trendb

0.90–1.05

0.49

0.68–1.34

0.79

0.59–1.31
0.50–1.16

0.52
0.20

0.20

a HR, 95% CI, and P values from the Cox proportional hazards models adjusted for age (continuous), gender, and smoking status (never, former, current) at baseline.
b Ps for trend across tertiles were conducted using the tertile variable as a continuous term.

significant 49% reduction in incidence among those in the
lowest tertile of baseline plasma selenium (HR ⫽ 0.51, 95%
CI ⫽ 0.32– 0.81, P ⫽ 0.005) and to a nonsignificant 30%
reduction in incidence among those in the second tertile (HR ⫽
0.70, 95% CI ⫽ 0.44 –1.09, P ⫽ 0.11). For those in the third
tertile, selenium supplementation was associated with a non-
significant 20% increase in incidence (HR ⫽ 1.20, 95% CI ⫽
0.77–1.86, P ⫽ 0.43). A significant interaction between treat-
ment group and tertile of baseline plasma selenium was evident
(P for interaction ⫽ 0.007).

As a means of exploring the nature of this interaction, we
present the HRs for total cancer according to baseline selenium

status within treatment group. Table 6 presents these HRs, 95%
CIs, and tests of statistical significance, relating baseline
plasma selenium concentrations to the subsequent development
of total cancer. HRs were calculated using three different ex-
posure measures of baseline plasma selenium: (a) as a contin-
uous variable (each unit ⫽ 10 ng/ml); (b) by the median value;
and (c) by tertiles.

A strong positive association between baseline plasma
selenium and the incidence of total cancer is seen within the
selenium group for the continuous, dichotomous, and trichot-
omous analyses of baseline selenium concentrations. When
baseline plasma selenium is treated as a continuous variable,

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

635

selenium supplementation increased total cancer incidence by
12% (HR ⫽ 0.12, 95% CI ⫽ 1.03–1.22, P ⫽ 0.005) for every
unit (where 1 unit ⫽ 10 ng/ml) increase in baseline plasma
selenium concentration. When selenium is treated as a dichot-
omous variable, the comparison of total cancers above the
median with those below the median yielded a HR of 1.45 (95%
CI ⫽ 0.98 –2.15, P ⫽ 0.06). Using the first baseline selenium
tertile as the referent group among selenium-supplemented
subjects, the HR was 1.29 (95% CI ⫽ 0.78 –2.15, P ⫽ 0.32) in
the second tertile and 1.88 (95% CI ⫽ 1.15–3.05, P ⫽ 0.01) in
the third tertile of baseline plasma selenium. The trend for this
association was statistically significant (P ⫽ 0.01). Thus, the
trichotomous analysis revealed that among selenium-supple-
mented participants, those in the third tertile experienced an
almost 2-fold, statistically significant elevation of incidence
compared with participants in the first tertile.

The association of baseline plasma selenium and total
cancer in the placebo group, albeit weak, was in the protective
direction, with individuals of higher status showing a lower
incidence of total cancer (Table 6). There was a nonsignificant
decrease in incidence of total cancer with increasing baseline
selenium in increments of 10 ng/ml (HR ⫽ 0.97, 95% CI ⫽
0.90 –1.05, P ⫽ 0.49). The decrease in incidence was also
nonsignificant when comparing the effects of baseline selenium
above the median, as opposed to below the median (HR ⫽ 0.95,
95% CI ⫽ 0.68 –1.34, P ⫽ 0.79). This nonsignificant reduction
in total cancer incidence is again apparent in the comparison of
tertiles of baseline plasma selenium. Using the first tertile as the
referent group, the HR was 0.88 (95% CI ⫽ 0.59 –1.31, P ⫽
0.52) in the second and 0.76 (95% CI ⫽ 0.50 –1.16, P ⫽ 0.20)
in the third tertile. The P for trend in this trichotomous analysis
was 0.20.

Discussion
The NPC Trial is the only double-blind, placebo-controlled, ran-
domized trial to date to have tested the effect of selenium supple-
mentation on cancer incidence in a Western population. The orig-
inal secondary analyses of the NPC data showed a highly
significant inverse association of selenium supplementation with
the incidence of total cancer through December 31, 1993, over a
mean period of 6.4 years of follow-up (1). In this report, we
describe analyses of the effect of selenium supplementation on
total cancer incidence through the end of randomized, blinded
treatment (February 1, 1996). This extended follow-up attenuated
the protective effect of selenium supplementation on total cancer
incidence, although selenium supplementation continued to reduce
the incidence of total cancer over a mean follow-up of more than
7 years. A significant inverse association with the most common
cancer, prostate cancer, was observed. For the next most common
sites, lung and colorectal cancers, respectively, inverse but non-
significant associations with selenium supplementation and inci-
dence were determined. These results are consistent with the
majority of epidemiological studies that support the efficacy of
selenium as a chemopreventive agent against all cancers (8–16)
and prostate (17–19), lung (12, 20–24), and colorectal cancers
(25–28). However, not all epidemiological trials consistently
support a protective association between selenium and cancer
(26, 29 – 41).

Of the remaining eight cancer sites evaluated in this report,
nonsignificant reductions in incidence were apparent in three
categories: (a) other carcinomas; (b) other noncarcinomas; and
(c) esophageal cancer. Results from epidemiological trials on
these three cancer categories have been inconsistent (41– 45).
Conversely, nonsignificant increases in incidence were

evident in five cancer types, including melanoma, bladder can-
cer, breast cancer, head and neck cancer, and lymphoma and
leukemia. These results, although nonsignificant and based on
small case numbers, may indicate potential increased risk with
selenium supplementation. Previous reports on the effects of
selenium on melanoma (24, 46 – 49), bladder cancer (33, 48,
50), head and neck cancer (51–53), and lymphoma and leuke-
mia (24, 37, 41, 54) in epidemiological trials have been varied.
The evidence associating selenium status and breast cancer is
conflicting. Analogous to that observed in the NPC Trial,
several prospective studies have shown nonsignificant positive
associations between serum (24) and toenail (55, 56) selenium
status and breast cancer. However, the lack of an association
between serum (57), toenail (58), and four indicators (59) of
selenium status and breast cancer risk has been suggested by
several case-control studies. Similarly, several prospective tri-
als have shown equivocal associations between serum (37, 60)
and toenail (61) selenium status and breast cancer risk. Many
case-control studies have suggested a protective effect of higher
selenium status (26, 62, 63) in postmenopausal but not pre-
menopausal women (64). In addition, inverse trends between
breast cancer and selenium concentrations in serum (29), toe-
nails (65), and drinking water (41) have been suggested in
prospective trials, although results were nonsignificant. More-
over, significant inverse associations between breast cancer risk
and serum (66 – 68) and hair (23) selenium have been docu-
mented.

Methodological issues, primarily the difficulty of assess-
ing long-term selenium exposure, may explain some of the
inconsistencies in the association of selenium and cancer re-
ported from epidemiological trials (69). In addition, treatment
and disease may alter selenium status and thus may lead to
temporal ambiguity and misclassification of selenium status.
Nevertheless, a meta-analysis of cohort studies comparing as-
sociations of serum selenium, retinol, ␤-carotene, and vitamin
E with cancer suggests that selenium has a remarkably consist-
ent protective effect (70).

Furthermore, evidence for the chemopreventive efficacy of
selenium has been consistently represented in laboratory trials,
although the exact mechanism(s) of its activity is unclear. The
overwhelming majority of in vivo studies in rodents have shown
that various forms of selenium inhibit carcinogen-induced co-
valent DNA adduct formation and retard oxidative damage to
DNA, lipids, and proteins at multiple organ sites (71). In vitro and
in vivo systems have shown that tumor cell growth, cell prolifer-
ation, and cell cycle biomarkers; apoptosis; p53 expression;
cyclooxygenase 2 expression; DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis;
the activation of transcriptional factors activator protein 1 and
nuclear factor ␬B; the activities of protein kinase C and protein
kinase A, thymidine kinase, c-Jun-NH2-kinase, and DNA cytosine
methyltransferase; and 8-isoprostane formation are modified by
various forms of selenium treatment (71).
Effect Modification. Several potential effect modifiers for the
effect of selenium supplementation on total cancer were pre-
sented in this analysis, including age at baseline, gender, and
baseline smoking and plasma selenium statuses. Our data sug-
gest that gender and baseline plasma selenium status predict the
effect of selenium supplementation on total cancer.
Gender. The high proportion of males in the trial reflects the
higher age-adjusted incidence of NMSC among men living in
the United States (for BCC, 247/100,000 PY for males and
150/100,000 PY for females; for SCC, 65/100,000 and 24/
100,000 PY for males and females, respectively) (72). The
difference in the participation of women also reflects the reli-

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

636

Se Supplementation and Cancer Incidence: The NPC Trial

ance on three Veterans Administration hospitals for subject
recruitment, where there was an overwhelming preponderance
of males among the potentially eligible patients. Whereas the
recruitment of patients was gender blind, it is likely that the
lower number of females in the trial and their lower incidence
of cancer limited the power to investigate the interaction be-
tween gender and treatment. Thus, the apparent interaction
between gender and treatment was not statistically significant,
and the overall protective treatment effect was detectable only
among males. Moreover, although the effect in men appeared to
be concentrated in those whose baseline plasma selenium con-
centrations were below the median or in the lowest tertiles,
baseline plasma selenium status did not modify the treatment
effect among women (data not shown).

This discrepancy in the effect of selenium supplementa-
tion on cancer protection by gender has also been noted else-
where. A case-control study of total cancer mortality nested
within a prospective trial of 10,532 persons in the Netherlands
showed that among males, the mean serum selenium for cases
was significantly less than that for controls and that the adjusted
risk of cancer mortality for the lowest quintile of serum sele-
nium (⬍100.8 ng/ml) was more than twice that of men with
higher concentrations (RR ⫽ 2.7, 90% CI ⫽ 1.2– 6.2; Ref. 30).
In females, however, selenium concentrations were similar
among cases and controls, with no evidence of increased cancer
mortality associated with low serum selenium (30). Similar
results were observed in a longitudinal study of 39,268 men and
women participating in the Finnish Social Insurance Institu-
tion’s Mobile Clinic Health Examination Survey (29).

Effect modification by gender may be attributed in part to
gender differences in selenium metabolism. In a European
study, females excreted significantly higher amounts of sele-
nium per kilogram of body weight compared with males (73).
Furthermore, whole-body residence time and body load ad-
justed for body weight have been estimated to be greater in
males than females (74). Patterson et al. (74) speculated that
these gender differences might reflect hormonal differences and
the strong affinity of the testes for selenium. Thus, future
chemoprevention trials may need to consider dose adjustments
for gender (74) or whether large numbers of women should be
included in the study samples. Clearly, we need to further
evaluate how gender may modify the effect of selenium on
cancer outcomes.
Smoking. After adjustment for age and gender, selenium sup-
plementation was associated with a statistically significant re-
duction in total cancer incidence among former smokers and
with nonsignificant reductions among never and current smok-
ers. This is consistent with the proposal that former smokers are
an ideal target population for chemoprevention trials (75, 76).
The ␣-Tocopherol ␤-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group
(77) documented a nonsignificant reduction in lung cancer
incidence with ␣-tocopherol and increased lung cancer inci-
dence with ␤-carotene in heavy current smokers. Cumulative
and continuing exposure to tobacco smoke may have over-
whelmed the effect of chemopreventive agents usually associ-
ated with early initiation and promotion stages of carcinogen-
esis (78).
Baseline Plasma Selenium. Clark et al. (1) reported that se-
lenium supplementation had the greatest effect on prostate
cancer prevention in men from this trial with the lowest base-
line plasma selenium status. In the current analyses, the pro-
tective effect of treatment on total cancer incidence was like-
wise confined to participants in the lowest tertile of baseline
plasma selenium. Moreover, a formal interaction between base-

line plasma selenium by tertile and treatment was detected in
this analysis. Modification of the association between treatment
and cancer incidence by baseline status of the supplemented
nutrient is strikingly similar to the treatment effects for prostate
cancer observed in the PHS (79, 80). Within the placebo group
of the PHS, those in the lowest versus the highest quartile of
baseline plasma ␤-carotene experienced a marginally signifi-
cant increased risk of prostate cancer (RR ⫽ 1.45, 95% CI ⫽
0.98 –2.15), with a marginally significant P for trend over
plasma quartiles. However, men in the lowest quartile randomly
assigned to ␤-carotene supplementation had a significant re-
duction in prostate cancer risk (RR ⫽ 0.68, 95% CI ⫽ 0.46 –
0.99) compared with those assigned to placebo. Supplementa-
tion of those in the highest baseline quartile was associated with
a nonsignificant increase in risk (RR ⫽ 1.33, 95% CI ⫽
0.91–1.96). Thus, ␤-carotene supplementation in the PHS re-
duced the risk of prostate cancer only among those individuals
with low baseline plasma ␤-carotene levels.

In the current analysis of the NPC Trial, attempts to glean
information on the nature of the effect modification of selenium
treatment by baseline plasma selenium reveal a complex and
confusing pattern, one that is not entirely consistent with our
understanding of selenium as protective against cancer. Indeed,
these results clearly indicate the lack of a protective effect
among participants whose baseline plasma selenium concen-
trations were in the upper tertile. It is noteworthy that this group
of participants was selected on the basis of residency in an area
in which the selenium intake was likely to be lower than in
other regions of the United States. Thus, these results provide
little support for the use of 200 ␮g selenium/day to protect
against cancer among average-risk individuals with plasma
concentrations at or above the United States estimated average
of 123 ng/ml (mean ⫾ SD serum selenium in 16,693 subjects
obtained from the Third National Health and Nutrition Exam-
ination Survey (NHANES III) was 123 ⫾ 17 ng/ml (81).

In addition, among selenium-supplemented individuals,
we observe a striking association; those with higher baseline
concentrations experienced an elevated incidence of cancer. A
pattern of modestly decreased incidence among placebo partic-
ipants coupled with no risk gradient among treated participants
seems somewhat plausible; however, the pattern we observed
was clearly unpredicted and unsettling. It is critical that this
effect be further evaluated in carefully controlled mechanistic
studies.

There are several limitations in this study. First, as men-
tioned earlier, total and site-specific cancers (excluding NMSC)
were not primary endpoints of the NPC Trial (82). Neverthe-
less,
the ascertainment of these endpoints did not change
throughout the entirety of the trial through February 1, 1996.
Second, this trial possessed differential statistical power to
detect an overall treatment effect in males versus females, as
well as for gender-specific cancers. An adequately powered
hypothesis-driven biomarker study should thus be conducted in
females, before women are included in large-scale chemopre-
vention trials with selenium. A third limitation is the inherent
difficulty in the assessment of selenium status. Due to varia-
tions in levels of the element between foodstuffs and the un-
certainty about the availability for absorption of the different
forms of the element, simple measures of dietary selenium
intake indicative of the general status of a population are not
sufficient for determining selenium status in individuals (83). It
is therefore necessary to measure biochemical concentrations of
selenium in the body and not simply gross intake (83). Ideally,
the combination of two or more indices of selenium status
would ensure a more accurate assessment. However, because

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

98.5% of the NPC participants had plasma selenium concen-
trations greater than the 70 –90 ng/ml required to maximize
plasma selenoproteins (84, 85), plasma selenium was the only
index used to measure selenium status in this trial. Although
plasma selenium concentrations reflect long-term selenium sta-
tus in populations with relatively constant selenium intakes, it
seems prudent that future selenium chemoprevention trials in-
clude multiple sequential plasma measures before randomiza-
tion to more accurately define an individual’s baseline plasma
selenium status.

Finally, although the incidence estimates were adjusted for
potential confounders such as age, gender, and smoking status,
the lack of detailed information on unmeasured risk factors
such as family history of cancer, physical activity level, bio-
chemical status of other nutrients, and dietary intake data from
foods and alcohol
is a possible limitation. Randomization
should minimize the likelihood of confounding by these factors.
However, it is noteworthy that, during 1994 –1995, plasma
selenium concentrations measured in 1134 British people ages
65 years and over were strongly and directly correlated with
plasma zinc, cholesterol, vitamin C, several carotenoids, and
␣-tocopherol, independent of age (86). Thus, future investiga-
tions of this cohort will consider the impact of other antioxi-
dants, including the tocopherols and carotenoids, on cancer
incidence and the extent to which they may modulate the effect
of selenium supplementation. In addition, we plan to conduct
genotype analyses on the study cohort to determine the effect of
selenium supplementation on the activity of the inducible en-
zyme thiolmethyltransferase, which is critical in the methyla-
tion of selenium compounds; the prevalence of genetic poly-
morphisms of key genes
in selenium and carcinogen
metabolism, including thiolmethyltransferase, classical gluta-
thione peroxidase (GSHPx-1; Refs. 87 and 88), and the recently
identified Mr 15,000 selenoprotein (89); and the effect of these
polymorphisms on cancer incidence and response to selenium
supplementation.

In conclusion, this summary analysis of the NPC Trial,
which includes data from the entire period of blinded treatment,
continues to provide support for the efficacy of selenium sup-
plementation in reducing total cancer incidence, total cancer
mortality, and the incidence of prostate cancer and, to a lesser
extent, lung and colorectal cancer. Not all site-specific cancers
exhibited a reduction in incidence, although small case numbers
limit the precision of our data. Indeed, the incidences of several
site-specific cancers, including breast cancer, were nonsignifi-
cantly increased with an average of 7.4 years of follow-up. The
protective effect of selenium supplementation on total cancer
incidence was most prominent in males and in those with lower
baseline plasma selenium concentrations. Those participants
with baseline plasma selenium concentrations above the United
States average showed a nonsignificant elevated incidence of
total cancer. Our data suggest that effect modification of the
association between selenium supplementation and cancer in-
cidence (and/or biomarkers of carcinogenesis) by baseline
plasma selenium status should be monitored and assessed in
ongoing and future selenium prevention trials including those
underway at the University of Arizona (90) and the recently
initiated Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (91).
Future research studies should evaluate selenium metab-
olism and the effect of supplementation on genetic biomarkers
of cancer risk in males and females to identify disparities that
may account for the apparent differences in the chemopreven-
tive effects of selenium between genders. Future studies should
also assess the effect of selenium supplementation on these
biomarkers in populations of varying selenium status both

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

637

within the United States and around the world to help elucidate
the mechanism by which selenium status mediates the chemo-
preventive activity of this element.

Acknowledgments
We thank all participants for their adherence and commitment throughout the
duration of this study and acknowledge the collaborating dermatologists for their
cooperation in facilitating the trial. We are grateful to Patricia Wilkins for her
meticulous data collection and study management, Edward Wittke for his critical
role in computer hardware, software and database management, and Phyllis Click,
R.N., and Victoria Brummet, R.N., for their tireless efforts in reviewing medical
documentation. We also wish to recognize the members of the Data Safety and
Monitoring Board: Dr. Tim Byers, Dr. Harvey Cohen, Dr. Stephen George, and
Dr. Robert Greenberg.

References
1. Clark, L. C., Combs, G. F., Jr., Turnbull, B. W., Slate, E. H., Chalker, D. K.,
Chow, J., Davis, L. S., Glover, R. A., Graham, G. F., Gross, E. G., Krongrad, A.,
Lesher, J. L. J., Park, H. K., Sanders, B. B. J., Smith, C. L., and Taylor, J. R., for
the Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Study Group. Effects of selenium supple-
mentation for cancer prevention in patients with carcinoma of the skin. A
randomized controlled trial. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 276: 1957–1963, 1996.
2. Clark, L. C., Graham, G. F., Crounse, R. G., Grimson, R., Hulka, B., and Shy,
C. M. Plasma selenium and skin neoplasms: a case-control study. Nutr. Cancer,
6: 13–21, 1984.
3. Olson, O. E., Palmer, I. S., and Cary, E. E. Modification of the official
fluorometric method for selenium in plants. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem., 58:
117–126, 1975.
4. McShane, L. M., Clark, L. C., Combs, G. F., Jr., and Turnbull, B. W.
Reporting the accuracy of biochemical measurements for epidemiologic and
nutrition studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 53: 1354 –1360, 1991.
5. Lin, D. Y., Shen, L., Ying, Z., and Breslow, N. E. Group sequential designs
for monitoring survival probabilities. Biometrics, 52: 1033–1041, 1996.
6. Stata Statistical Software Version 6.0. College Station, TX: Stata Corp., 1999.
7. Clark, L. C., Dalkin, B., Krongrad, A., Combs, G. F., Jr., Turnbull, B. W.,
Slate, E. H., Witherington, R., Herlong, J. H., Janosko, E., Carpenter, D., Borosso,
C., Falk, S., and Rounder, J. Decreased incidence of prostate cancer with selenium
supplementation: results of a double-blind cancer prevention trial. Br J. Urol., 81:
730 –734, 1998.
8. Shamberger, R. J., and Frost, D. V. Possible protective effect of selenium
against human cancer. Can. Med. Assoc. J., 100: 682– 686, 1969.
9. Clark, L. C. The epidemiology of selenium and cancer. Fed. Proc., 44:
2584 –2589, 1985.
10. Yu, S-Y., Chu, Y-J., Gong, X-L., Hou, C., Li, W-G., Gong, H-M., and Xie,
J-R. Regional variation of cancer mortality incidence and its relation to selenium
levels in China. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 7: 21–29, 1985.
11. Schrauzer, G. N. Cancer mortality correlation studies. II. Regional associa-
tions of mortalities with the consumptions of foods and other commodities. Med.
Hypotheses, 2: 39 – 49, 1976.
12. Willett, W. C., Polk, B. F., Morris, J. S., Stampfer, M. J., Pressel, S., Rosner,
B., Taylor, J. O., Schneider, K., and Hames, C. G. Prediagnostic serum selenium
and risk of cancer. Lancet, 2: 130 –134, 1983.
13. Salonen, J. T., Alfthan, G., Huttunen, J. K., and Puska, P. Association
between serum selenium and the risk of cancer. Am. J. Epidemiol., 120: 342–349,
1984.
14. Salonen, J. T., Salonen, R., Lappetelainen, R., Maenpaa, P. H., Alfthan, G.,
and Puska, P. Risk of cancer in relation to serum concentrations of selenium and
vitamins A and E: matched case-control analysis of prospective data. Br. Med. J.
Clin. Res., 290: 417– 420, 1985.
15. Fex, G., Pettersson, B., and Akesson, B. Low plasma selenium as a risk factor
for cancer death in middle-aged men. Nutr. Cancer, 10: 221–229, 1987.
16. Blot, W. J., Li, J. Y., Taylor, P. R., Guo, W., Dawsey, S. M., and Li, B. The
Linxian trials: mortality rates by vitamin-mineral intervention group. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 62: 1424S⫺1426S, 1995.
17. Hardell, L., Degerman, A., Tomic, R., Marklund, S. L., and Bergfors, M.
Levels of selenium in plasma and glutathione peroxidase in erythrocytes in
patients with prostate cancer or benign hyperplasia. Eur. J. Cancer Prev., 4:
91–95, 1995.
18. Nomura, A. M., Lee, J., Stemmermann, G. N., and Combs, G. F., Jr. Serum
selenium and subsequent risk of prostate cancer. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark.
Prev., 9: 883– 887, 2000.
19. Yoshizawa, K., Willett, W. C., Morris, S. J., Stampfer, M. J., Spiegelman, D.,
Rimm, E. B., and Giovannucci, E. Study of prediagnostic selenium level in

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

638

Se Supplementation and Cancer Incidence: The NPC Trial

toenails and the risk of advanced prostate cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. (Bethesda),
90: 1219 –1224, 1998.
20. Zachara, B. A., Marchaluk-Wisniewska, E., Maciag, A., Peplinski, J.,
Skokowski, J., and Lambrecht, W. Decreased selenium concentration and gluta-
thione peroxidase activity in blood and increase of these parameters in malignant
tissue of lung cancer patients. Lung, 175: 321–332, 1997.
21. Knekt, P., Marniemi, J., Teppo, L., Heliovaara, M., and Aromaa, A. Is low
selenium status a risk factor for lung cancer? Am. J. Epidemiol., 148: 975–982,
1998.
22. van den Brandt, P. A., Goldbohm, R. A., van’t Veer, P., Bode, P., Dorant, E.,
Hermus, R. J., and Sturmans, F. A prospective cohort study on selenium status
and the risk of lung cancer. Cancer Res., 53: 4860 – 4865, 1993.
23. Piccinini, L., Borella, P., Bargellini, A., Medici, C. I., and Zoboli, A. A
case-control study on selenium, zinc, and copper in plasma and hair of subjects
affected by breast and lung cancer. Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 51: 23–30, 1996.
24. Coates, R. J., Weiss, N. S., Daling, J. R., Morris, J. S., and Labbe, R. F. Serum
levels of selenium and retinol and the subsequent risk of cancer. Am. J. Epide-
miol., 128: 515–523, 1988.
25. Shenberg, C., Feldstein, H., Cornelis, R., Mees, L., Versieck, J., Vanballen-
berghe, L., Cafmeyer, J., and Maenhaut, W. Br, Rb, Zn, Fe, Se and K in blood of
colorectal patients by INAA and PIXE. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 9: 193–199,
1995.
26. Ghadirian, P., Maisonneuve, P., Perret, C., Kennedy, G., Boyle, P., Krewski,
D., and Lacroix, A. A case-control study of toenail selenium and cancer of the
breast, colon, and prostate. Cancer Detect. Prev., 24: 305–313, 2000.
27. Nelson, R. L., Davis, F. G., Sutter, E., Kikendall, J. W., Sobin, L. H., Milner,
J. A., and Bowen, P. E. Serum selenium and colonic neoplastic risk. Dis. Colon
Rectum, 38: 1306 –1310, 1995.
28. Beno, I., Klvanova, J., Magalova, T., and Brtkova, A. Blood levels of natural
antioxidants in gastric and colorectal precancerous lesions and cancers in Slova-
kia. Neoplasma (Bratisl.), 47: 37– 40, 2000.
29. Knekt, P., Aromaa, A., Maatela, J., Alfthan, G., Aaran, R. K., Hakama, M.,
Hakulinen, T., Peto, R., and Teppo, L. Serum selenium and subsequent risk of
cancer among Finnish men and women. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. (Bethesda), 82:
864 – 868, 1990.
30. Kok, F. J., de Bruijn, A. M., Hofman, A., Vermeeren, R., and Valkenburg,
H. A. Is serum selenium a risk factor for cancer in men only? Am. J. Epidemiol.,
125: 12–16, 1987.
31. Hartman, T. J., Albanes, D., Pietinen, P., Hartman, A. M., Rautalahti, M.,
Tangrea, J. A., and Taylor, P. R. The association between baseline vitamin E,
selenium, and prostate cancer in the ␣-Tocopherol, ␤-Carotene Cancer Prevention
Study. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev., 7: 335–340, 1998.
32. Helzlsouer, K. J., Huang, H. Y., Alberg, A. J., Hoffman, S., Burke, A.,
Norkus, E. P., Morris, J. S., and Comstock, G. W. Association between ␣-to-
copherol, ␥-tocopherol, selenium, and subsequent prostate cancer. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. (Bethesda), 92: 2018 –2023, 2000.
33. Nomura, A., Heilbrun, L. K., Morris, J. S., and Stemmermann, G. N. Serum
selenium and the risk of cancer, by specific sites: case-control analysis of
prospective data. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. (Bethesda), 79: 103–108, 1987.
34. Kabuto, M., Imai, H., Yonezawa, C., Neriishi, K., Akiba, S., Kato, H.,
Suzuki, T., Land, C. E., and Blot, W. J. Prediagnostic serum selenium and zinc
levels and subsequent risk of lung and stomach cancer in Japan. Cancer Epide-
miol. Biomark. Prev., 3: 465– 469, 1994.
35. Comstock, G. W., Alberg, A. J., Huang, H. Y., Wu, K., Burke, A. E.,
Hoffman, S. C., Norkus, E. P., Gross, M., Cutler, R. G., Morris, J. S., Spate, V. L.,
and Helzlsouer, K. J. The risk of developing lung cancer associated with anti-
oxidants in the blood: ascorbic acid, carotenoids, ␣-tocopherol, selenium, and
total peroxyl radical absorbing capacity. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev., 6:
907–916, 1997.
36. Schober, S. E., Comstock, G. W., Helsing, K. J., Salkeld, R. M., Morris, J. S.,
Rider, A. A., and Brookmeyer, R. Serologic precursors of cancer. I. Prediagnostic
serum nutrients and colon cancer risk. Am. J. Epidemiol., 126: 1033–1041, 1987.
37. Criqui, M. H., Bangdiwala, S., Goodman, D. S., Blaner, W. S., Morris, J. S.,
Kritchevsky, S., Lippel, K., Mebane, I., and Tyroler, H. A. Selenium, retinol,
retinol-binding protein, and uric acid. Associations with cancer mortality in a
population-based prospective case-control study. Ann. Epidemiol., 1: 385–393,
1991.
38. Ratnasinghe, D., Tangrea, J. A., Forman, M. R., Hartman, T., Gunter, E. W.,
Qiao, Y-L., Yao, S-X., Barett, M. J., Giffen, C. A., Erozan, Y., Tockman, M. S.,
and Taylor, P. R. Serum tocopherols, selenium and lung cancer risk among tin
miners in China. Cancer Causes Control, 11: 129 –135, 2000.
39. van den Brandt, P. A., Goldbohm, R. A., van’t Veer, P., Bode, P., Dorant, E.,
Hermus, R. J., and Sturmans, F. A prospective cohort study on toenail selenium
levels and risk of gastrointestinal cancer. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. (Bethesda), 85:
224 –229, 1993.

40. Bostick, R. M., Potter, J. D., McKenzie, D. R., Sellers, T. A., Kushi, L. H.,
Steinmetz, K. A., and Folsom, A. R. Reduced risk of colon cancer with high
intake of vitamin E: the Iowa Women’s Health Study. Cancer Res., 53: 4230 –
4237, 1993.
41. Vinceti, M., Rovesti, S., Gabrielli, C., Marchesi, C., Bergomi, M., Martini,
M., and Vivoli, G. Cancer mortality in a residential cohort exposed to environ-
mental selenium through drinking water. J. Clin. Epidemiol., 48: 1091–1097,
1995.
42. Garland, M., Morris, J. S., Stampfer, M. J., Colditz, G. A., Spate, V. L.,
Baskett, C. K., Rosner, B., Speizer, F. E., Willett, W. C., and Hunter, D. J.
Prospective study of toenail selenium levels and cancer among women. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. (Bethesda), 87: 497–505, 1995.
43. Glattre, E., Thomassen, Y., Thoresen, S. O., Haldorsen, T., Lund-Larsen,
P. G., Theodorsen, L., and Aaseth, J. Prediagnostic serum selenium in a case-
control study of thyroid cancer. Int. J. Epidemiol., 18: 45– 49, 1989.
44. Burney, P. G., Comstock, G. W., and Morris, J. S. Serologic precursors of
cancer: serum micronutrients and the subsequent risk of pancreatic cancer. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr., 49: 895–900, 1989.
45. Mark, S. D., Qiao, Y. L., Dawsey, S. M., Wu, Y. P., Katki, H., Gunter, E. W.,
Fraumeni, J. F., Jr., Blot, W. J., Dong, Z. W., and Taylor, P. R. Prospective study
of serum selenium levels and incident esophageal and gastric cancers. J. Natl.
Cancer Inst. (Bethesda), 92: 1753–1763, 2000.
46. Vinceti, M., Rothman, K. J., Bergomi, M., Borciani, N., Serra, L., and Vivoli,
G. Excess melanoma incidence in a cohort exposed to high levels of environ-
mental selenium. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev., 7: 353–357, 1998.
47. Reinhold, U., Biltz, H., Bayer, W., and Schmidt, K. H. Serum selenium levels
in patients with malignant melanoma. Acta Dermato-Venereol., 69: 132–136,
1989.
48. Knekt, P., Aromaa, A., Maatela, J., Alfthan, G., Aaran, R. K., Nikkari, T.,
Hakama, M., Hakulinen, T., and Teppo, L. Serum micronutrients and risk of
cancers of low incidence in Finland. Am. J. Epidemiol., 134: 356 –361, 1991.
49. Breslow, R. A., Alberg, A. J., Helzlsouer, K. J., Bush, T. L., Norkus, E. P.,
Morris, J. S., Spate, V. E., and Comstock, G. W. Serological precursors of cancer:
malignant melanoma, basal and squamous cell skin cancer, and prediagnostic
levels of retinol, ␤-carotene, lycopene, ␣-tocopherol, and selenium. Cancer Epi-
demiol. Biomark. Prev., 4: 837– 842, 1995.
50. Helzlsouer, K. J., Comstock, G. W., and Morris, J. S. Selenium, lycopene,
␣-tocopherol, ␤-carotene, retinol, and subsequent bladder cancer. Cancer Res.,
49: 6144 – 6148, 1989.
51. Zheng, W., Blot, W. J., Diamond, E. L., Norkus, E. P., Spate, V., Morris,
J. S., and Comstock, G. W. Serum micronutrients and the subsequent risk of oral
and pharyngeal cancer. Cancer Res., 53: 795–798, 1993.
52. Lajtman, Z., Nosso, D., Romic, Z., Trutin-Ostovic, K., and Krpan, D. La-
ryngeal cancer and blood selenium levels. Eur. Arch. Oto-Rhino-Laryngol., 251:
170 –172, 1994.
53. Rogers, M. A., Thomas, D. B., Davis, S., Weiss, N. S., Vaughan, T. L., and
Nevissi, A. E. A case-control study of oral cancer and pre-diagnostic concentra-
tions of selenium and zinc in nail tissue. Int. J. Cancer, 48: 182–188, 1991.
54. Guven, M., Ozturk, B., Sayal, A., and Ozet, A. Lipid peroxidation and
antioxidant system in the blood of patients with Hodgkin’s disease. Clin. Bio-
chem., 33: 209 –212, 2000.
55. Hunter, D. J., Morris, J. S., Stampfer, M. J., Colditz, G. A., Speizer, F. E., and
Willett, W. C. A prospective study of selenium status and breast cancer risk.
J. Am. Med. Assoc., 264: 1128 –1131, 1990.
56. van Noord, P. A., Maas, M. J., van der Tweel, I., and Collette, C. Selenium
and the risk of postmenopausal breast cancer in the DOM cohort. Breast Cancer
Res. Treat., 25: 11–19, 1993.
57. Overvad, K., Gron, P., Langhoff, O., Tarp, U., Foldspang, A., and Thorling,
E. B. Selenium in human mammary carcinogenesis: a case-referent study. Eur. J.
Cancer Prev., 1: 27–30, 1991.
58. van’t Veer, P., Strain, J. J., Fernandez-Crehuet, J., Martin, B. C., Thamm, M.,
Kardinaal, A. F., Kohlmeier, L., Huttunen, J. K., Martin-Moreno, J. M., and Kok,
F. J. Tissue antioxidants and postmenopausal breast cancer: the European Com-
munity Multicentre Study on Antioxidants. Myocardial Infarction, and Cancer of
the Breast (EURAMIC). Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev., 5: 441– 447, 1996.
59. van’t Veer, P., van der Wielen, R. P., Kok, F. J., Hermus, R. J., and Sturmans,
F. Selenium in diet, blood, and toenails in relation to breast cancer: a case-control
study. Am. J. Epidemiol., 131: 987–994, 1990.
60. Dorgan, J. F., Albanes, D., Virtamo, J., Heinonen, O. P., Chandler, D. W.,
Galmarini, M., McShane, L. M., Barrett, M. J., Tangrea, J., and Taylor, P. R.
Relationships of serum androgens and estrogens to prostate cancer risk: results
from a prospective study in Finland. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev., 7:
1069 –1074, 1998.
61. van Noord, P. A., Collette, H. J., Maas, M. J., and de Waard, F. Selenium
levels in nails of premenopausal breast cancer patients assessed prediagnostically

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

639

in a cohort-nested case-referent study among women screened in the DOM
project. Int. J. Epidemiol., 16: 318 –322, 1987.
62. Gerber, M., Richardson, S., Salkeld, R., and Chappuis, P. Antioxidants in
female breast cancer patients. Cancer Investig., 9: 421– 428, 1991.
63. Strain, J. J., Bokje, E., van’t Veer, P., Coulter, J., Stewart, C., Logan, H.,
Odling-Smee, W., Spence, R. A., and Steele, K. Thyroid hormones and selenium
status in breast cancer. Nutr. Cancer, 27: 48 –52, 1997.
64. Mannisto, S., Alfthan, G., Virtanen, M., Kataja, V., Uusitupa, M., and
Pietinen, P. Toenail selenium and breast cancer-a case-control study in Finland.
Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 54: 98 –103, 2000.
65. van den Brandt, P. A., Goldbohm, R. A., van’t Veer, P., Bode, P., Dorant, E.,
Hermus, R. J., and Sturmans, F. Toenail selenium levels and the risk of breast
cancer. Am. J. Epidemiol., 140: 20 –26, 1994.
66. Hardell, L., Danell, M., Angqvist, C. A., Marklund, S. L., Fredriksson, M.,
Zakari, A. L., and Kjellgren, A. Levels of selenium in plasma and glutathione
peroxidase in erythrocytes and the risk of breast cancer. A case-control study.
Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 36: 99 –108, 1993.
67. Gupta, S., Narang, R., Krishnaswami, K., and Yadav, S. Plasma selenium
level in cancer patients. Indian J. Cancer, 31: 192–197, 1994.
68. Basu, T. K., Hill, G. B., Ng, D., Abdi, E., and Temple, N. Serum vitamins A
and E, ␤-carotene, and selenium in patients with breast cancer. J. Am. Coll. Nutr.,
8: 524 –529, 1989.
69. Combs, G. F., Jr., and Combs, S. B. Selenium and cancer. In: G. F. Combs
Jr. and S. B. Combs (eds.), The Role of Selenium in Nutrition, pp. 413– 462. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1986.
70. Comstock, G. W., Bush, T. L., and Helzlsouer, K. Serum retinol, ␤-carotene,
vitamin E, and selenium as related to subsequent cancer of specific sites. Am. J.
Epidemiol., 135: 115–121, 1992.
71. El-Bayoumy, K. The protective role of selenium on genetic damage and on
cancer. Mutat. Res., 475: 123–139, 2001.
72. Scotto, J., Fears, T. R., and Fraumeni, J. F. Incidence of Nonmelanoma Skin
Cancer in the United States. NIH Publication. Washington, DC: United States
Department of Health and Human Services, 1983.
73. Rodrigue Zrodriguez, E. M., San Zalaejos, M. T., and Dia Zromero, C.
Urinary selenium status of healthy people. Eur. J. Clin. Chem. Clin. Biochem., 33:
127–133, 1995.
74. Patterson, B., Veillon, C. C., Taylor, P., Patterson, K., and Levander, O. A.
Selenium metabolism in humans differs by gender: results from a stable isotope
tracer study. FASEB J., 15: A969, 2001.
75. Burns, D. M. Primary prevention, smoking, and smoking cessation: impli-
cations for future trends in lung cancer prevention. Cancer (Phila.), 89: 2506 –
2509, 2000.
76. Khuri, F. R., Kurie, J. M., and Hong, W. K. Chemoprevention of respiratory
tract cancer. Hematol. Oncol. Clin. N. Am., 11: 387– 408, 1997.
77. The ␣-Tocopherol ␤-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of
vitamin E and ␤-carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in
male smokers. N. Engl. J. Med., 330: 1029 –1035, 1994.

78. Blumberg, J., and Block, G. The ␣-tocopherol, ␤-carotene cancer prevention
study in Finland. Nutr. Rev., 52: 242–245, 1994.
79. Hennekens, C. H., Buring, J. E., Manson, J. E., Stampfer, M., Rosner, B.,
Cook, N. R., Belanger, C., LaMotte, F., Gaziano, J. M., Ridker, P. M., Willett, W.,
and Peto, R. Lack of effect of long-term supplementation with ␤-carotene on the
incidence of malignant neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. N. Engl. J. Med.,
334: 1145–1149, 1996.
80. Cook, N. R., Stampfer, M. J., Ma, J., Manson, J. E., Sacks, F. M., Buring,
J. E., and Hennekens, C. H. ␤-Carotene supplementation for patients with low
baseline levels and decreased risks of total and prostate carcinoma. Cancer
(Phila.), 86: 1783–1792, 1999.
81. Hu, G., and Cassano, P. A. Antioxidant nutrients and pulmonary function: the
Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III). Am. J.
Epidemiol., 151: 975–981, 2000.
82. Colditz, G. A. Selenium and cancer prevention. Promising results indicate
further trials required. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 276: 1984 –1985, 1996.
83. Reilly, C. Selenium in Food and Health. London: Blackie Academic &
Professional, 1996.
84. Hill, K. E., Xia, Y., Akesson, B., Boeglin, M. E., and Burk, R. F. Seleno-
protein P concentration in plasma is an index of selenium status in selenium-
deficient and selenium-supplemented Chinese subjects. J. Nutr., 126: 138 –145,
1996.
85. Duffield, A. J., Thomson, C. D., Hill, K. E., and Williams, S. An estimation
of selenium requirements for New Zealanders. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 70: 896 –903,
1999.
86. Bates, C. J., Thane, C. W., Prentice, A., and Delves, H. T. Selenium status
and its correlates in a British national diet and nutrition survey: people aged 65
years and over. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol., 16: 1– 8, 2002.
87. Ratnasinghe, D., Tangrea, J. A., Andersen, M. R., Barrett, M. J., Virtamo, J.,
Taylor, P. R., and Albanes, D. Glutathione peroxidase codon 198 polymorphism
variant increases lung cancer risk. Cancer Res., 60: 6381– 6383, 2000.
88. Forsberg, L., de Faire, U., Marklund, S. L., Andersson, P. M., Stegmayr, B.,
and Morgenstern, R. Phenotype determination of a common Pro-Leu polymor-
phism in human glutathione peroxidase 1. Blood Cells Mol. Dis., 26: 423– 426,
2000.
89. Kumaraswamy, E., Malykh, A., Korotkov, K. V., Kozyavkin, S., Hu, Y.,
Kwon, S. Y., Moustafa, M. E., Carlson, B. A., Berry, M. J., Lee, B. J., Hatfield,
D. L., Diamond, A. M., and Gladyshev, V. N. Structure-expression relationships
of the 15-kDa selenoprotein gene. Possible role of the protein in cancer etiology.
J. Biol. Chem., 275: 35540 –35547, 2000.
90. Clark, L. C., and Marshall, J. R. Randomized, controlled chemoprevention
trials in populations at very high risk for prostate cancer: elevated prostate-
specific antigen and high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Urology, 57:
185–187, 2001.
91. Klein, E. A., Thompson, I. M., Lippman, S. M., Goodman, P. J., Albanes, D.,
Taylor, P. R., and Coltman, C. SELECT: the next prostate cancer prevention trial.
J. Urol., 166: 1311–1315, 2001.

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

Baseline Characteristics and the Effect of Selenium
Supplementation on Cancer Incidence in a Randomized 
Clinical Trial: A Summary Report of the Nutritional Prevention
of Cancer Trial
(cid:160) 
Anna J. Duffield-Lillico, Mary E. Reid, Bruce W. Turnbull, et al. 
(cid:160) 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev(cid:160)

2002;11:630-639. 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

Updated version
(cid:160) 

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/11/7/630
 
(cid:160) 

Cited articles
(cid:160) 
Citing articles
(cid:160) 

This article cites 83 articles, 17 of which you can access for free at:
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/11/7/630.full#ref-list-1
 
(cid:160) 
This article has been cited by 50 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
 
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/11/7/630.full#related-urls
(cid:160) 

E-mail alerts
(cid:160) 
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
(cid:160) 
Permissions
(cid:160) 

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

pubs@aacr.org
.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at
(cid:160) 
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
.
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/11/7/630
Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's (CCC)
Rightslink site. 
(cid:160) 

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2002 American Association for Cancer Research. 

Original article

Annals of Oncology 14: 78–84, 2003
DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdg022

Dietary glycemic index, glycemic load and ovarian cancer risk: 
a case–control study in Italy
L. S. A. Augustin1,2, J. Polesel1, C. Bosetti1,3, C. W. C. Kendall2, C. La Vecchia3,4, M. Parpinel1, 
E. Conti5, M. Montella6, S. Franceschi1,7, D. J. A. Jenkins2 & L. Dal Maso1*

1Servizio di Epidemiologia, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Aviano, Italy; 2Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto and the Clinical Nutrition and Risk Factor Modification Centre, St Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
3Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche “Mario Negri”, Milan; 4Istituto di Statistica Medica e Biometria, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan; 
5Servizio Integrato di Epidemiologia e Sistemi Informativi, Rome; 6Istituto Tumori “Fondazione Pascale”, Naples, Italy; 7International Agency for Research on 
Cancer, Lyon, France

Received 3 April 2002; Revised 3 July 2002; accepted 18 July 2002

Background: Dietary carbohydrates vary in their ability to raise blood glucose and insulin levels, which, in
turn, influence levels of sex hormones and insulin-like growth factors. We analyzed the effect of type and
amount of carbohydrates on ovarian cancer risk, using the glycemic index (GI) and the glycemic load (GL)
measurement in a large case–control study conducted in Italy.
Materials and methods: Cases  included  1031  women  with  incident,  histologically  confirmed  epithelial
ovarian  cancer,  from  four  Italian  regions.  Controls  included  2411  women  admitted  to  the  same  hospital
networks for acute, non-neoplastic conditions. Average daily GI and GL were calculated from a validated
food frequency questionnaire. Odds ratios (OR) and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
computed using multiple logistic regression.
Results: Ovarian cancer was directly associated with dietary GI (OR for highest versus lowest quartile = 1.7,
95%  CI  1.3–2.1) and  GL (OR  = 1.7,  95%  CI 1.3–2.1). The  associations were observed in  pre- and  post-
menopausal women, and they remained consistent across strata of major covariates identified.
Conclusions: This study supports the hypothesis of a direct association between GI and GL and ovarian
cancer  risk  and,  consequently,  of  a  possible  role  of  hyperinsulinemia/insulin  resistance  in  ovarian  cancer
development.
Key words: carbohydrate, case–control study, glycemic load, ovarian cancer

Introduction
Ovarian  cancer  is  directly  related  to  nulliparity,  and  inversely
related to oral contraceptive use, but little is known of its poten-
tial dietary correlates [1]. It has been suggested that diet may have
a  potential  influence  on  ovarian  carcinogenesis,  and  several
case–control studies have reported a beneficial effect on the risk
of ovarian cancer of a diet rich in vegetables [2, 3]. A few case–
control  studies  showed  that  women  with  cancer  of  the  ovary
reported more frequent meat consumption [4, 5], and others sug-
gested that a diet rich in eggs may also increase the risk of ovarian
cancer [2, 6]. Fish, on the other hand, seemed to exert a protective
effect [5, 6].

With reference to specific nutrients, descriptive epidemiology
and  ecological  studies  have  reported  positive  relationships
between fat, protein and total calory intake, and ovarian cancer

*Corresponding author: Dr Luigino Dal Maso, Servizio di Epidemiologia, 
Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, Via Pedemontana Occ., 33081 Aviano 
(PN), Italy. Tel: +39-0434-659-354; Fax: +39-0434-659-222; 
E-mail: epidemiology@cro.it

© 2003 European Society for Medical Oncology

risk [7]. Data from analytical, mainly case–control studies sup-
ported the hypothesis of a possible increased risk in relation to
various types of fat [2, 6]. Carbohydrates have also been shown to
increase the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer [8].

Different  carbohydrates,  however,  affect  blood  glucose  and
insulin levels to varying degrees depending on the nature of the
carbohydrate and the type and extent of food processing [9]. On
this basis they have been ranked using the glycemic index (GI)
and  glycemic  load  (GL).  Foods  with  high  GI  tend  to  increase
glucose and insulin levels to a greater extent than low GI foods
[9]. In turn, it has been proposed that insulin may be directly or
indirectly  involved  in  the  carcinogenic  process  by  modulating
hormonal levels such as sex hormones and insulin-like growth
factors (IGF) [10]. High-GL diets have been directly associated
with risk of various Western chronic conditions, including dia-
betes [11], coronary heart disease [12], colorectal [13] and breast
[14]  cancer,  and  high  insulin  levels  may  be  one  of  the  mech-
anisms of action of risk factors shared by these diseases [15].

We  thus  evaluated  the  possible  differential  effects  of carbo-
hydrate-rich foods on epithelial ovarian cancer risk by means of
the GI and GL measurements in a large case–control study.

Materials and methods

A multicenter case–control study of ovarian cancer was conducted between
January 1992 and September 1999 in four Italian regions: Greater Milan, the
provinces of Pordenone, Padua and Gorizia (north-eastern Italy); the province
of Latina (central Italy); and the urban area of Naples (southern Italy).

Cases included women with incident, histologically confirmed epithelial
ovarian cancer diagnosed within 1 year prior to interview and with no previ-
ous diagnosis of cancer. Overall, 1031 women aged 18–79 years (median age
56 years) were included. Controls included patients with no history of cancer
who were admitted to hospitals serving the same areas as those where cases
had  been  identified.  Eligible  diagnoses  were  acute,  non-neoplastic,  non-
gynecological conditions, unrelated to hormonal or digestive tract diseases,
or  associated  with  long-term  modifications  of  diet.  They  included  2411
women, aged 17–79 years (median age 57 years), belonging to the following
diagnostic  categories:  trauma,  mostly  fractures  and  sprains  (26%);  other
orthopedic disorders, such as low back pain and disc disorders (28%); acute
surgical conditions (15%); and other illnesses, such as eye, ear, nose, skin and
dental conditions (31%). Cases were frequency matched to controls accord-
ing to quinquennium of age and area of residence. Approximately 4% of cases
and controls approached for interview during their hospital stay refused to
participate.

The same structured questionnaire and coding manual were used in each
center, and all interviewers were centrally trained and routinely supervised.
The  checking  of  data  for  consistency  and  reliability  was  also  conducted
centrally.  The  questionnaire  included  information  on  sociodemographic
characteristics, such as education and occupation, lifelong smoking habits,
physical  activity  at  various  ages,  anthropometric  measures,  a  problem-
oriented  personal  medical  history,  family  history  of  selected  cancers,
menstrual  and  reproductive  history,  history  of  use  of  oral  contraceptives,
hormone replacement treatment, and female hormone-containing drugs for
other indications. Dietary habits were investigated through an interviewer-
administered  food  frequency  questionnaire  (FFQ)  that  included  78  items.
This questionnaire was used to assess the subjects’ habitual diet during the
2  years  prior  to  cancer  diagnosis  or  hospital  admission  (for  controls),  and
included questions on the average weekly frequency of consumption of foods
or food groups, as well as complex recipes. Satisfactory reproducibility [16]
and validity [17] of the FFQ have been reported. Details on methodology used
have  been  described  elsewhere  [13,  14].  To  compute  energy  and  nutrient
intake,  an  Italian  food-composition  database  was  used.  For  each  food,  we
expressed GI as a percentage of the glycemic response elicited using ‘white
bread’ as a standard food. We then calculated daily average GI by summing
the products of the carbohydrate content per serving for each food or recipe,
multiplied by the average number of servings of that food per week, multi-
plied  by  its  GI,  all  divided  by  the  total  amount  of  available  carbohydrate
weekly  intake.  This  represents  the  ‘quality  of  the  carbohydrates’,  namely
slow versus fast absorbable carbohydrates. A score for the daily average GL
was computed as the GI, but without dividing by the total amount of carbo-
hydrates. For these calculations we used the carbohydrate content of 50 foods
or  recipes,  since  28  foods  or  recipes,  chiefly  cheese,  meat  and fish-based,
contained a negligible amount of carbohydrate. With respect to GI values, we
chiefly used international tables. In order to take into account Italian cooking
habits (e.g. pasta ‘al dente’), Italian sources were used for a few local recipes.
Food items for which a GI had not been determined were assigned the GI of
the nearest comparable food (e.g. tangerines were assigned the same GI as
oranges).

Odds ratios (ORs) and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
quartiles of GI and GL intake were computed using unconditional multiple
logistic regression models [18]. The regression equations included terms for
quinquennia of age, study center, years of education, occupational physical
activity, history of diabetes, oral contraceptive use, parity, menopausal status,

79

number  of  daily  meals,  intakes  of  fiber,  alcohol  and  total  energy  intake.
Adjustment for energy was made using the residuals method. The modifying
effect of various covariates was evaluated comparing the differences between
the –2 log likelihood of the model with and without interaction terms, and
referring it to the chi square distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the
number of interaction terms minus one.

Results

Table 1 gives the distribution of ovarian cancer cases and control
subjects according to age, education, menopausal status and other
potential confounding factors. Cases were better educated than
controls, had a lower parity, frequently reported a family history
of ovarian and/or breast cancer, and a lower occupational phys-
ical activity.

GI  was  positively  correlated  with  GL  (Pearson  correlation
coefficient, r = 0.53), intake of bread (r = 0.59), cereals (r = 0.56),
cakes and sweets (r = 0.33), sugar (r = 0.26), available carbo-
hydrates  (r  =  0.37),  cereal  fibre  (r  =  0.42),  and  negatively
correlated  with  fruit  (r  =  –0.19)  and  vegetables  (r  =  –0.11).
Correlations  of  GI  with  other  dietary  and  non-dietary  factors
were weak (i.e. |r| < 0.10).

Table 2 shows the ORs of epithelial ovarian cancer according
to the quartiles of GI and GL, and total carbohydrate intake by
menopausal status. Dietary GI and GL were directly associated
with  ovarian  cancer  risk,  and  the  ORs,  for  the  highest  versus
the  lowest  quartile,  were  1.7  (95%  CI  1.3–2.1)  and  1.7  (95%
CI 1.3–2.1), respectively. However, ORs by quartile of GI and
GL did not show linear trends, but were already elevated in the
second  quartile  and  tended  to  plateau  thereafter.  Associations,
particularly for GI, were appreciably stronger in postmenopausal
compared with premenopausal women, although no significant
heterogeneity  emerged.  Total  carbohydrate  intake  was  also
associated with ovarian cancer (OR = 1.8, in the highest quartile,
95% CI 1.3–2.4) in postmenopausal women (Table 2).

Table  3  shows  the  relationship  between  GI  and  epithelial
ovarian  cancer  in  different  strata  of  known  or  suspected  risk
factors for ovarian cancer. No substantial effect modification was
apparent in strata of: family history of ovarian or breast cancer;
oral contraceptive use; and parity.

The relationship between GI and epithelial ovarian cancer risk
was also analyzed in separate strata of history of diabetes, body
mass index (BMI), BMI increase from age 30, waist to hip (W/H)
ratio, occupational physical activity and alcohol intake (Table 4).
There was no consistent pattern of risk among diabetic subjects
or in different strata of BMI, BMI increase from age 30, and W/H
ratio. There was, however, a significant modifying effect of alco-
hol, with no consistent association with GI in alcohol abstainers.
The association with GI was stronger in women reporting higher
physical activity.

Although risk factors, including dietary factors, may differ in
their  relationship  to  specific  histological  subtypes  of  ovarian
cancer [19], no relevant difference emerged when we replicated
the  analyses  for  GI  and  GL  in  invasive  serous  ovarian  cancer
only. Other histological subtypes represented <10% of cases in
our data set.

80

Table 1. Distribution of 1031 cases of epithelial ovarian cancer and 2411 controlsa, according to age and selected 
variables (Italy, 1992–99)

Characteristic

Age groups (years)

<45

45–54

55–64
≥65

Education (years)

<7

7–11
≥12

Menopausal status

Premenopausal

Postmenopausal

Parity (number of births)

Nulliparae

1–2
≥3

Oral contraceptive use

Never

Ever

Diabetes history

No

Yes

Family history of breast or ovarian cancerc

No

Yes

Occupational physical activity

Low

Medium

High

Alcohol intake (drinks per week)

Abstainers

1–6

7–13
≥14

Meal frequency

1 per day

2 per day or more

Fibre intake (g/day)

<17.5

17.5–22.2

22.2–27.1
≥27.1

Cases

n

183

287

325

236

570

227

22

346

683

184

572

275

921

110

986

45

902

129

331

492

175

288

261

226

256

40

991

218

257

280

276

%

17.8

27.8

31.5

22.9

55.6

22.2

22.2

33.6

66.4

17.8

55.5

26.7

89.3

10.7

95.6

4.4

87.5

12.5

33.2

49.3

17.5

27.9

25.3

21.9

24.9

3.9

96.1

21.1

24.9

27.2

26.8

aSome figures do not add up to the total as some values are missing.
bCochran–Mantel–Haenzel χ2 adjusted for center and age.
cIn immediate relatives.

Controls

n

443

615

724

629

1417

620

349

803

1603

381

1268

762

2142

269

2324

87

2291

120

677

1237

426

833

542

421

615

83

2325

647

611

568

585

%

18.4

25.5

30.0

26.1

59.4

26.0

14.6

33.4

66.6

15.8

52.6

31.6

88.8

11.2

96.4

3.6

95.0

5.0

28.9

52.9

18.2

34.5

22.5

17.5

25.5

3.5

96.5

26.8

25.3

23.6

24.3

χ2 b

(P value)

38.90

(<0.01)

0.02

(0.89)

48.20

(<0.01)

0.18

(0.67)

0.06

(0.81)

55.95

(0.01)

22.75

(<0.01)

0.31

(0.58)

0.47

(0.48)

6.71

(0.01)

81

Table 2. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)a of epithelial ovarian cancer by quartile of energy-adjusted glycemic index, glycemic 
load and total carbohydrate intake (Italy, 1992–99)

Cases:controlsb

Quartile, OR (95% CI)

χ2
1 (trend) (P value)

Glycemic index

Upper limitd

1c

2

70.8

74.4

3

77.7

4

–

Premenopausal

346:803

Postmenopausal

683:1603

All cases

1031:2411

1

1

1

1.33 (0.88–2.00)

1.42 (0.95–2.14)

1.36 (0.90–2.05)

2.12 (0.15)

1.83 (1.36–2.47)

2.10 (1.57–2.82)

1.84 (1.37–2.48)

16.29 (<0.01)

1.61 (1.27–2.04)

1.80 (1.43–2.27)

1.65 (1.30–2.09)

16.81 (<0.01)

Glycemic load

Upper limitd

147

185

234

–

Premenopausal

346:803

Postmenopausal

683:1603

All cases

1031:2411

1

1

1

1.49 (0.99–2.25)

1.68 (1.09–2.57)

1.39 (0.92–2.10)

2.31 (0.13)

1.37 (1.02–1.84)

1.49 (1.11–2.00)

1.83 (1.36–2.46)

15.58 (<0.01)

1.40 (1.11–1.78)

1.54 (1.22–1.96)

1.65 (1.30–2.09)

16.89 (<0.01)

Total carbohydrate intake (g)

Upper limitd

Premenopausal

346:803

Postmenopausal

683:1603

All cases

1031:2411

7.57

9.44

11.55

–

1

1

1

1.31 (0.86–1.98)

1.33 (0.86–2.06)

1.39 (0.90–2.15)

1.87 (0.17)

1.49 (1.11–1.99)

1.55 (1.14–2.10)

1.75 (1.28–2.39)

11.40 (<0.01)

1.44 (1.13–1.82)

1.48 (1.16–1.90)

1.62 (1.27–2.08)

12.93 (<0.01)

aAdjusted for age, study center, years of education, occupational physical activity, meal frequency, alcohol consumption, fibre and energy intake, 
history of diabetes, oral contraceptive use, parity and menopausal status (when appropriate).
cSome figures do not add up to total because of some missing value.
cReference category.
dIn overall population of cases and controls.

Table 3. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)a of epithelial ovarian cancer by strata of selected variables and quartile of 
energy-adjusted glycemic index (Italy, 1992–99)

Cases:controlsb

Quartile, OR (95% CI)

χ2
1 (P value)

Upper limitd

1c

70.8

2

74.4

3

77.7

4

–

Family history of breast and/or ovarian cancere

Yes

No

129:120

902:2291

Oral contraceptive use

Yes

No

110:269

921:2142

Parity (no. of births)

Nulliparae

1–2
≥3

184:381

572:1268

275:762

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2.05 (0.85–4.96)

1.59 (0.72–3.53)

1.45 (0.61–3.44)

0.51 (0.48)

1.64 (1.27–2.11)

1.84 (1.44–2.37)

1.70 (1.32–2.19)

16.67 (<0.01)

2.25 (1.06–4.76)

2.02 (0.98–4.18)

1.53 (0.71–3.28)

0.84 (0.36)

1.52 (1.18–1.96)

1.77 (1.38–2.28)

1.61 (1.25–2.07)

14.52 (<0.01)

2.30 (1.26–4.20)

2.01 (1.10–3.66)

1.39 (0.77–2.51)

1.51 (1.10–2.07)

1.75 (1.27–2.40)

1.62 (1.16–2.25)

0.98 (0.32)

8.90 (<0.01)

1.95 (1.20–3.18)

2.39 (1.51–3.81)

2.26 (1.42–3.59)

11.67 (<0.01)

aAdjusted for age, study center, years of education, occupational physical activity, meal frequency, alcohol consumption, fibre and energy 
intake, history of diabetes, oral contraceptive use, parity and menopausal status (when appropriate).
bSome figures do not add up to the total as some values are missing.
cReference category.
dIn the overall population of cases and controls.
eIn immediate relatives.

82

Table 4. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs)a of epithelial ovarian cancer by strata of selected variables and quartile of energy-
adjusted glycemic index (Italy, 1992–99)

Cases:controlsb

Quartile, OR (95% CI)

χ2
1 (trend) (P value)

Upper limitd

Diabetes

Yes

No

45:87

986:2324

Body Mass Index (BMI)

<25
≥25

549:1266

472:1128

BMI increase from age 30 yearse

≤0
>0 to 4

>4

Waist to hip ratio

<0.83
≥0.83

228:467

465:1001

233:716

319:922

407:925

Occupational physical activity

Low

Medium

High

331:677

492:1237

175:426

Alcohol intake (drinks per week)

Abstainers

1–6

7–13
≥14

288:833

261:542

226:421

256:615

1c

70.8

2

74.4

3

77.7

4

–

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0.75 (0.16–3.47)

1.66 (0.37–7.55)

1.04 (0.22–5.05)

0.13 (0.71)

1.69 (1.32–2.15)

1.88 (1.48–2.39)

1.69 (1.33–2.16)

17.44 (<0.01)

1.63 (1.16–2.28)

1.84 (1.32–2.54)

1.48 (1.06–2.07)

1.66 (1.18–2.35)

1.71 (1.20–2.43)

1.79 (1.26–2.54)

4.97 (0.03)

9.77 (<0.01)

1.57 (0.96–2.57)

1.79 (1.11–2.87)

1.74 (1.07–2.83)

1.73 (1.20–2.50)

1.75 (1.22–2.52)

1.65 (1.14–2.37)

1.61 (0.99–2.62)

2.09 (1.28–3.40)

1.67 (1.01–2.75)

5.07 (0.02)

6.31 (0.01)

4.89 (0.03)

1.62 (1.08–2.44)

1.95 (1.31–2.90)

1.43 (0.93–2.19)

3.99 (0.05)

1.82 (1.23–2.68)

1.80 (1.23–2.63)

1.95 (1.33–2.84)

10.04 (<0.01)

1.58 (1.01–2.48)

1.62 (1.05–2.49)

1.27 (0.82–1.97)

1.55 (1.11–2.18)

1.68 (1.20–2.36)

1.56 (1.11–2.21)

1.14 (0.29)

6.32 (0.01)

1.95 (1.03–3.68)

3.16 (1.72–5.81)

3.05 (1.64–5.67)

14.70 (<0.01)

1.56 (1.01–2.40)

1.32 (0.86–2.03)

0.98 (0.63–1.51)

0.16 (0.69)

1.78 (1.09–2.93)

2.54 (1.55–4.15)

2.22 (1.35–3.63)

11.65 (<0.01)

1.34 (0.75–2.37)

2.29 (1.29–4.07)

2.15 (1.20–3.84)

1.89 (1.15–3.11)

1.96 (1.21–3.16)

2.24 (1.37–3.66)

8.93 (<0.01)

9.62 (<0.01)

aAdjusted for age, study centre, years of education, occupational physical activity, meal frequency, alcohol consumption, fibre and energy intake, 
history of diabetes, oral contraceptive use, parity and menopausal status (when appropriate).
bSome figures do not add up to the total as some values are missing.
cReference category.
dIn the overall population of cases and controls.
eFor subjects aged 35 years or more.

Discussion

The present study shows direct associations between dietary GI
and GL and epithelial ovarian cancer risk. An elevated risk was
found in the second quartile of GI and GL, but did not show a
further increase in the third and fourth (highest) quartile. These
associations were consistent across different strata of known or
potential risk factors for ovarian cancer. However, the relation-
ship between GI and epithelial ovarian cancer in our study was
somewhat  stronger  in  post-  compared  with  premenopausal
women, and in women without a family history and in parae.

Diets with high GI or GL are associated with a high consump-
tion of refined carbohydrates, which are quickly absorbed and are
capable of elevating blood glucose and insulin level to a greater

extent  than  slowly  absorbed  ones,  such  as  pulses  and  whole
grains, which are low GI foods [20]. The main sources of carbo-
hydrates in the Italian population are bread, a high GI food, and
pasta, a medium-low GI food, representing 20.5% and 13.4% of
total carbohydrate intake, respectively [13].

High insulin levels have been suggested as a potential unifying
mechanism  for  the  risk  of  several  Western  chronic  diseases
related to high intakes of energy, fat, refined carbohydrates, and
low physical activity and obesity [15]. Central obesity (i.e. high
W/H ratio) was associated with ovarian cancer risk in this study
[21]. Diabetes, which is characterized by high insulin levels in its
early stages,  was considered  as a possible correlate of ovarian
cancer risk. However, in line with other studies [22, 23] a history
of diabetes was not found to consistently affect ovarian cancer

risk in the present study. This could, however, have resulted from
the small absolute number of diabetic subjects (∼4%).

Insulin  is  a  growth  factor  for  cancer  cells,  and  it  has  been
shown to act as a cancer promoter in in vitro and in animal studies
[15, 24]. Insulin also has affinity for IGF receptors, particularly
the IGF-1 receptor, which has strong mitogenic effects on normal
and  neoplastic  cells,  including  ovarian  carcinoma  cell  lines,
where it has been found at higher levels than in non-malignant
cells [25]. Epidemiological evidence suggests a promoting effect
of hyperinsulinemia [15] and of IGF-1 in carcinogenesis [25].

Insulin and IGF-1 are also powerful negative regulators of sex
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) synthesis in vitro, and they
may stimulate ovarian cancer proliferation through a hormonal
pathway  [26].  An  interaction  between  insulin,  IGFs  and  sex
hormones has also been suggested for breast cancer [27].

As in most case–control studies, recall and selection biases are
possible [18]. However, awareness about any dietary hypotheses,
and particularly those related to GI and GL, for ovarian cancer was
limited in the Italian population when the study was conducted.
While  it  is  conceivable  that  dietary  habits  of  hospital  controls
may  have  differed  from  those  of  the  general  population,  great
attention was paid in this study to minimize bias by excluding
control  subjects  admitted  for  conditions  that  might  have  been
associated with special dietary habits. Of greater concern is the
early  weight  loss  often  occurring  in  ovarian  cancer  patients,
which may have led cases to increase their energy and, hence,
carbohydrate  intake  [21].  We  had,  however,  information  on
weight loss during the year prior to cancer diagnosis or interview.
Stratification and adjustment for weight or recent weight loss did
not  modify  the  association  with  GI  and  GL.  Interviewing  all
subjects in a hospital setting may have allowed greater compar-
ability of  dietary history  between  cases  and  controls [28],  and
adjustment  for  total  energy  intake  should  have  controlled  for
potential dietary over- and under-reporting. Furthermore, parti-
cipation among eligible patients was practically complete and the
catchment areas for cases and controls were highly comparable.
GI estimates have some limitations. Some GI estimates have
been derived from small samples and their variability is unclear
[13]. Statistics on the average dietary GI and GL in the general
Italian population are not available, but intakes of bread and pasta
in the present study were similar to those reported in the Italian
population  [29].  In  addition,  it  would  be  important  to  confirm
the association between GI, GL and ovarian cancer in different
populations, since the genotype for insulin resistance may vary
between ethnic groups [30].

The major strength of this study is its uniquely large dataset,
which allowed reasonably precise risk estimates. Other strengths
include consistency of findings, when major categories of con-
trols were used separately, and its reliance on a validated food
frequency questionnaire [16, 17].

In conclusion, this study found associations between dietary
GI, GL and ovarian cancer risk, thus supporting a possible role of
insulin  and  insulin-related  factors  in  ovarian  carcinogenesis.
Similar associations were observed for colorectal [13] and breast
[14]  cancer,  indicating  the  potential  role  of  these  factors  on
several common neoplasms.

83

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the contribution of the Italian Association for
Research on Cancer, and the Italian League Against Cancer, Milan, Italy. The
authors wish to thank Mrs Luigina Mei for editorial assistance.

References

1. World Cancer Research Fund in Association with the American Institute
for  Cancer  Research.  Food,  nutrition  and  the  prevention  of  cancer,  a
global  perspective.  Washington,  DC:  World  Cancer  Research  Fund
1997.

2. Kushi  LH,  Mink  PJ,  Folsom  AR  et  al.  Prospective  study  of  diet  and

ovarian cancer. Am J Epidemiol 1999; 149: 21–31.

3. Engle  A,  Muscat  JE,  Harris  RE.  Nutritional  risk  factors  and  ovarian

cancer. Nutr Cancer 1991; 15: 239–247.

4. Shu XO, Gao YT, Yuan JM et al. Dietary factors and epithelial ovarian

cancer. Br J Cancer 1989; 59: 92–96.

5. Bosetti C, Negri E, Franceschi S et al. Diet and ovarian cancer risk: a

case–control study in Italy. Int J Cancer 2001; 93: 911–915.

6. Cramer  DW,  Welch  WR,  Hutchison  GB  et  al.  Dietary  animal  fat  in

relation to ovarian cancer risk. Obstet Gynecol 1984; 63: 833–838.

7. Byers  T, Marshall  J,  Graham  S  et  al.  A  case–control  study  of  dietary
and non-dietary factors in ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993; 71:
681–686.

8. Bidoli E, La Vecchia C, Montella M et al. Nutrient intake and ovarian
cancer: an Italian case–control study. Cancer Causes Control 2002; 13:
255–261.

9. Jenkins DJA, Wolever TMS, Taylor RH et al. Glycemic index of foods: a
physiological basis for carbohydrate exchange. Am J Clin Nutr 1981; 34:
362–366.

10. Stoll BA. Western nutrition and the insulin resistance syndrome: a link to

breast cancer. Eur J Clin Nutr 1999; 53: 83–87.

11. Salmeron J, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ et al. Dietary fibre, glycemic load,
and risk of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in women. JAMA
1997; 277: 472–477.

12. Liu S, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ et al. A prospective study of dietary
glycemic load, carbohydrate intake, and risk of coronary heart disease in
US women. Am J Clin Nutr 2000; 71: 1455–1461.

13. Franceschi S, Dal Maso L, Augustin L et al. Dietary glycemic load and

colorectal cancer risk. Ann Oncol 2001; 12: 173–178.

14. Augustin LS, Dal Maso L, Franceschi S et al. Dietary glycemic index and
glycemic load and breast cancer risk: a case–control study. Ann Oncol
2001; 12: 1533–1538.

15. Giovannucci E. Insulin and colon cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1995;

6: 164–179.

16. Franceschi S, Barbone F, Negri E et al. Reproducibility of an Italian food
frequency questionnaire for cancer studies. Results for specific nutrients.
Ann Epidemiol 1995; 5: 69–75.

17. Decarli  A,  Franceschi  S,  Ferraroni  M  et  al.  Validation  of  a  food-
frequency  questionnaire  to  assess  dietary  intakes  in  cancer  studies  in
Italy. Results for specific nutrients. Ann Epidemiol 1996; 6: 110–118.

18. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research. Vol. I. The
analysis of case–control studies. IARC Scientific Publications No. 32.
Lyon: International Agency for Research on Cancer 1980.

19. Risch HA, Marrett LD, Jain M, Howe GR. Differences in risk factors for
epithelial ovarian  cancer by  histologic type. Results of a  case–control
study. Am J Epidemiol 1996; 144: 363–372.

20. Jenkins  DJ,  Wolever  TM,  Jenkins  AL.  Starchy  foods  and  glycemic

index. Diabetes Care 1988; 11: 149–159.

84

21. Dal Maso L, Franceschi S, Negri E et al. Body size indices at different
ages and epithelial ovarian cancer risk. Eur J Cancer 2002; 38: 1769–
1774.

22. Parazzini  F,  Moroni  S,  La  Vecchia  C  et  al.  Ovarian  cancer  risk  and
history of selected medical conditions linked with female hormones. Eur
J Cancer 1997; 33: 1634–1637.

23. Adler AI, Wiss NS, Kamb ML, Lyon JL. Is diabetes mellitus a risk factor
for  ovarian  cancer?  A  case–control  study  in  Utah  and  Washington
(United States). Cancer Causes Control 1996; 7: 475–478.

24. Tran TT, Medline A, Bruce WR. Insulin promotion of colon tumors in

rats. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1996; 5: 1013–1015.

25. Yu  H,  Rohan  T.  Role  of  insulin-like  growth  factor  family  in  cancer
development and progression. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000; 92: 1472–1489.

26. Risch  HA.  Hormonal  etiology  of  epithelial  ovarian  cancer,  with  a
hypothesis  concerning  the  role  of  androgens  and  progesterone.  J  Natl
Cancer Inst 1998; 90: 1774–1786.

27. Yee D, Lee AV. Crosstalk between the insulin-like growth factors and
estrogens in breast cancer. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2000; 5:
107–115.

28. D’Avanzo B, La Vecchia C, Katsouyanni K et al. An assessment, and
reproducibility of food frequency data provided by hospital controls. Eur
J Cancer Prev 1997; 6: 288–293.

29. Turrini A, Leclercq C, D’Amicis A. Patterns of food and nutrient intakes
in Italy and their application to the development of food-based dietary
guidelines. Br J Nutr 1999; 81 (Suppl 2): S83–S89.

30. Kasim-Karakas SE. Ethnic differences in the insulin resistance syndrome.

Am J Clin Nutr 2000; 71: 670–671.

ARTICLES

Nutrition  Intervention  Trials  in  Linxian,  China:
Supplementation  With  Specific  Vitamin/Mineral
Combinations,  Cancer  Incidence,  and  Disease-
Specific  Mortality  in  the  General  Population

William  J.  Blot,  Jun-Yao  Li,  Philip  R.  Taylor,  Wande  Guo,
Sanford  Dawsey,  Guo-Qing  Wang,  Chung  S.  Yang,  Su-Fang  Zheng,
Mitchell  Gail,  Guang-Yi  Li,  Yu  Yu,  Buo-qi  Liu,  Joseph  Tangrea,
Yu-hai  Sun,  Fusheng  Liu,  Joseph  F.  Fraumeni,  Jr.,  You-Hui
Zhang,  Bing  Li*

from 

in  1985 

Background:  Epidemiologic  evidence  indicates  that  diets
high 
in  fruits  and  vegetables  are  associated  with  a
reduced  risk  of  several  cancers,  including  cancers  of  the
esophagus  and  stomach.  Vitamins  and  minerals  in  these
foods  may  contribute  to  the  reduced  cancer  risk.  The
people  of  Linxian  County,  China,  have  one  of  the  world's
highest  rates  of  esophageal/gastric  cardla  cancer  and  a
persistently  low  intake  of  several  micronutrients.  Pur-
pose:  We  sought  to  determine  if  dietary  supplementation
with  specific  vitamins  and  minerals  can  lower  mortality
from  or  incidence  of  cancer  as  well  as  mortality  from
other  diseases  in  Linxian.  Methods:  Individuals  of  ages
40-69  were  recruited 
four  Linxian
communes.  Mortality  and  cancer  incidence  during  March
1986-May  1991  were  ascertained  for  29584  adults  who
received  daily  vitamin  and  mineral 
supplementation
throughout  this  period.  The  subjects  were  randomly
assigned  to  intervention  groups  according  to  a  one-half
replicate  of  a  24  factorial  experimental  design.  This
design  enabled  testing  for  the  effects  of  four  combina-
tions  of  nutrients:  (A)  retinol  and  zinc;  (B)  riboflavin  and
niacin;  (C)  vitamin  C  and  molybdenum;  and  (D)  beta
carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium.  Doses  ranged  from
one  to  two  times  U.S.  Recommended  Daily  Allowances.
Results:  A  total  of  2127  deaths  occurred  among  trial
participants  during  the  intervention  period.  Cancer  was
the  leading  cause  of  death,  with  32%  of  all  deaths  due  to
esophageal  or  stomach  cancer,  followed  by  cerebrovascu-
lar  disease  (25%).  Significantly  (P  =  .03)  lower  total
mortality  (relative  risk  [RR]  =  0.91;  95%  confidence
interval  [CI]  =  0.84-0.99)  occurred  among  those  receiving
supplementation  with  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and

selenium.  The  reduction  was  mainly  due  to  lower  cancer
rates  (RR  =  0.87;  95%  CI  =  0.75-1.00),  especially
stomach  cancer  (RR  =  0.79;  95%  CI  =  0.64-0.99),  with
the  reduced  risk  beginning  to  arise  about  1-2  years  after
the  start  of  supplementation  with  these  vitamins  and
minerals.  No  significant  effects  on  mortality  rates  from
all  causes  were  found  for  supplementation  with  retinol
and  zinc,  riboflavin  and  niacin,  or  vitamin  C  and
molybdenum.  Patterns  of  cancer  incidence,  on  the  basis
of  1298  cases,  generally  resembled  those  for  cancer
mortality.  Conclusions:  The  findings  indicate  that  vitamin
and  mineral  supplementation  of  the  diet  of  Linxian
adults,  particularly  with  the  combination  of  beta  car-
otene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium,  may  effect  a  reduction  in
cancer  risk  in  this  population.  Implications:  The  results
on  their  own  are  not  definitive,  but  the  promising
findings  should  stimulate  further  research  to  clarify  the
potential  benefits  of  micronutrient  supplements.  [J  Natl
Cancer  Inst  85:1483-1492,  1993]

Linxian,  a rural  county  in  Henan  Province  of  north-central
China,  has  one  of  the  world's  highest  rates  of  esophageal
cancer  (7).  Mortality  rates  from  this  cancer  exceed  the
Chinese  national  average  by  10-fold  and  the  American
average  for  Whites  by  100-fold  (2).  The  tumors  arise  not
only  as  squamous  cell  carcinomas  in  the esophagus,  but  also
beyond  the  esophageal-gastric  junction  as  adenocarcinomas
in  the  cardia  region  of  the  stomach.  Historically,  esophageal
and  gastric  cardia  cancers  have  been  considered  as  a  single

*See  "Notes"  section  following  "References."

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

ARTICLES  1483

clinical  entity  for  incidence  and  mortality  rate  calculations  in
Linxian  (/).

Table  1.  Types  and  daily  doses  of  micronutrients  by  treatment  factor

Reasons  for  the  clustering  of  esophageal-gastric  cardia
cancer  in  Linxian  are  unknown;  case-control  studies  (3,4)
have  failed  to  detect  strong  dietary  or  other  risk  factors.  A
number  of  investigations  (5)  conducted  in  other  areas  of  the
world  have  found  that  consumption  of  fresh  vegetables  and
fruits  is  associated  with  a  reduced  risk  of  both  esophageal
and  stomach  cancers.  The  particular  constituents  of  vegeta-
bles  and  fruits  responsible  for  the  protective  effect  have  not
been  determined,  but 
trends  have  been  shown
between  cancer  risk  and 
intake  of  several
micronutrients  found  in  these  foods,  especially  vitamin  C
and  beta  carotene 
In  experimental  animals  also,
deficiencies  of  certain  nutrients  may  enhance  chemical
carcinogenesis,  while  nutrient  supplementation  may  inhibit
tumor  formation  (7).

indices  of 

inverse 

(6). 

Food  availability  and  variety  in  Linxian  have  historically
been  limited.  Although  completion  of  a  massive  agricultural
irrigation  system  in  1965  resulted  in  increased  production  of
several  foods,  diets  typically  have  remained  low  in  intake  of
fresh  fruits  and  meat  and  other  animal  products.  The  major
staples  are  corn,  millet,  sweet  potatoes,  and  wheat.  In
surveys  {8-11)  of  Linxian  residents  during  the  1970s  and
early  1980s,  blood  levels  of  various  micronutrients,  includ-
ing  retinol,  beta  carotene,  riboflavin,  vitamin  C,  and  vitamin
E  were  consistently 
low  by  Western  standards,  although
overt  clinical  deficiencies  were  not  common.

to 

two 

trials 

Because  of 

the  site  for 

(i.e.,  esophageal  and  gastric)  and 

its  extraordinarily  high  rates  of  epithelial
cancers 
subclinical
deficiencies  of  several  micronutrients  among  the  population,
Linxian  was  selected  as 
randomized
intervention 
test  whether  supplementation  with
multiple  vitamins  and  minerals  might  reduce  the  rates  of
cancer.  One  trial  involved  approximately  3300  participants
with  esophageal  dysplasia  and  is  the  subject  of  another
article  in  this  issue  of  the  Journal  (12).  In  this  presentation,
we  describe  results  from  a  larger  trial 
involving  nearly
30000  residents  from  the  high-risk  Linxian  general  popula-
tion.  We  present  tests  of  the  initial  effectiveness  of  four
specific  combinations  of  vitamins  and  minerals  in  reducing
cancer  incidence  and  mortality  as  well  as  mortality  from
other  diseases  during  the  course  of  the  intervention.

Factor

Micronutrients

Dose  per  day

A

B

C

D

Retinol  (as  palmitate)
Zinc  (as  zinc  oxide)
Riboflavin
Niacin
Ascorbic  acid
Molybdenum  (as  molybdenum  yeast  complex)
Beta  carotene
Selenium  (as  selenium  yeast)
Alpha-tocopherol

5000  IU
22.5  mg
3.2  mg
40  mg
120  mg
30  u.g
15  mg
50  u,g
30  mg

While  a  separate  evaluation  of  each  of  the  nine,  and  perhaps  additional,
nutrients  listed  in  Table  1  would  have  been  desirable,  a  29  or  higher
factorial  experiment  was  impractical.  The  feasible  options  were  to  delete
certain  nutrients  or  to  combine  them  into  a  smaller  number  of  groups.  We
chose  the  latter  approach,  combining  zinc,  which  enhances  the  delivery  of
retinol  to  tissues,  and  retinol  (Factor  A);  the  B  vitamins  riboflavin  and
niacin  (Factor  B);  vitamin  C  and  molybdenum,  which  are  thought  to  inhibit
the 
formation  of  carcinogenic  nitrosamines  and  nitrosamine-induced
esophageal  carcinogenesis,  respectively  (Factor  C);  and  the  fat-soluble
antioxidants  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium  (Factor  D). A  fractional
factorial  design  was  selected  because  it  permitted  testing  of  the  main
effects  of  four  factors  at  less  cost  and  complexity  than  a  full  24  factorial
design.  The  eight  intervention  groups  in  this  fractional  design  were  defined
by  the  following  combinations  of  supplements:  AB,  AC,  AD,  BC,  BD,  CD,
ABCD,  or  placebo.  Thus,  persons  in  group  AB,  e.g.,  received  retinol,  zinc,
riboflavin,  and  niacin,  while  those  in  group  ABCD  received  all  nine
vitamins  and  minerals  and  those  in  the  placebo  group  received  none.  This
choice  of  groups  resulted  in  half  the  participants  receiving  each  of  the  four
factor  nutrient  combinations.  For  example,  half  received  factor  A  (AB,  AC,
AD,  ABCD)  and  half  did  not  (BC,  BD,  CD,  placebo),  and  the  subjects  that
received  versus  those  that  did  not  receive  factor  A  were  balanced  with
respect  to  receipt  of  all  other  nutrients.

The  eight  vitamin/mineral  combinations  were  packaged  in  coded  bottles
containing  a  1-month  supply  and  were  distributed  monthly  by  approx-
imately  200  village  doctors  beginning 
in  March  1986  and  continuing
through  May  1991.  Compliance  was  assessed  in  two  ways:  by  counting
unused  pills  and  by  assaying  nutrient 
from
approximately  120  individuals  randomly  selected  without  replacement  every
3  months  during  the  course  of  the  trials.

levels  in  blood  collected 

through 

Mortality  among  trial  participants  was  ascertained  via  follow-up  by
village  doctors.  Diagnoses  of  cancer  were  ascertained 
local
commune  and  county  hospitals  and  supplemented  by  a  study  medical  team
that  provided  clinical  and  diagnostic  services,  including  endoscopy,  for
participants  with  symptoms  suggestive  of  esophageal  or  stomach  cancer.
Diagnostic  materials  (e.g.,  x  rays, cytology,  biopsy,  and  surgical  specimens)
for  85%  of  the  cancer  cases  were  reviewed  by  a  panel  of  senior  Chinese
radiology,  cytology,  and
and  American  experts 
pathology.  Reviews  were  conducted 
in  parallel  by  senior  Chinese
diagnosticians  for  the  remaining  cancer  cases  and  for  deaths  due  to  causes
other  than  cancer.

in  gastroenterology, 

Subjects  and  Methods

Participants  in  the  trial  were  recruited  in  1985  from  four  communes  in
Linxian.  Residents  aged  40-69  years  without  debilitating  diseases  or  prior
esophageal  or  stomach  cancer  who  were  willing  to  take  part  in  a  multiyear,
daily  pill-taking  regimen  were  sought  for  enrollment.  These  individuals
were  given  a  brief  physical  examination,  had  a  10-mL  blood  sample
collected  and  stored,  and  were  interviewed  regarding  aspects  of  their
medical,  family,  dietary,  and  tobacco  and  alcohol  consumption  histories.
The  participants  were  randomly  assigned  to  receive  one  of  eight  vitamin/
mineral  supplement  combinations  in  the  form  of  individual  oral  tablets.  The
treatment  combinations  were  randomly  assigned  within  blocks  defined  by
commune  (four  communes),  sex,  and  age  (by  single  years).  The  eight
intervention  groups  were  derived  from  a  one-half  replicate  of  a  2*  factorial
design  (13).  The  factorial  design  allowed  us  to  assess  four  factors  (i.e.,
nutrient  combinations)  in  a  single  experiment.  The  four  factors,  which  we
designate  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  and  D,  are  defined  in  Table  1.  Doses  of
each  nutrient  ranged  from  one  to  two  times  U.S.  Recommended  Daily
Allowances  (RDAs).

rates  were  calculated 

In  addition,  we  calculated 

Statistical  analyses  focused  on  estimating  the  effects  of  supplementation
with  each  of  the  four  vitamin/mineral  factors  upon  5'A-yeai  (March  1986-
May  1991)  total  mortality  and  cancer  mortality  rates.  Incidence  and
for  esophageal,  gastric  cardia,  other
mortality 
stomach,  and  other  cancers. 
rates  of
cerebrovascular  disease  mortality  and  other  causes  of  death.  Proportional
hazards  regression  analyses  (14)  were  employed  to  estimate  relative  risks
(RRs)  of  mortality  and  cancer  incidence  and  corresponding  95%  confidence
intervals  (Cls)  for  the  four  main  effects  after  adjustment  for  matching
variables.  Additional  adjustment  for  baseline  data  on  cigarette  smoking  and
parental  history  of  cancer,  two  risk  factors  for  esophageal/stomach  cancer
in  this  population,  resulted  in  essentially  no  change  and  is  not  presented.
Regressions  were  also  run  with  only  the  use  of  events  and  person-years
occurring  12 or  more  months  after  the  intervention  began,  a  procedure  that
allowed  for  a  latency  period  before  a  treatment  effect  might  occur.  Tests
for  pairwise  interactions  between  factors  were  able  to  be  calculated,  but
with  the  fractional  design,  only  three  of  the  six  two-way  interactions  could
be  evaluated.  Furthermore,  because  the  interaction  between  any  two  of  the
four  factors,  say  A  and  B,  is  mathematically  equivalent  to  the  interaction
between  the  remaining  two  factors  (i.e.,  C  and  D),  interactive  effects  for
one  pair  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  other.  Thus,  these  tests  were  not

1484  ARTICLES

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

pursued.  In  addition  to  calculating  5'A-year  rates,  we  plotted  cumulative
mortality  and  incidence  by  calendar  quarter  throughout  the  study  period.
All  P  values  associated  with  comparisons  of  those  receiving  versus  those
not  receiving  a  particular  vitamin/mineral  factor  are  nominal  and  based  on
two-sided  tests,  even  though  one-sided  tests  would  have  been  appropriate
because  of  the  a  priori  hypotheses  of  beneficial  effects  of  the  supplements.

Results

Of  the  approximately  50000  potentially  eligible  partici-
pants,  16% refused  to  participate,  12%  were  out  of  the  area,
3%  were  too  sick,  and  8%  did  not  join  the  trial  for  other
reasons.  In  addition,  1.4%  were  excluded  due 
to  self-
reported  cancer  at  screening  or  death  or  diagnosis  of  cancer
prior  to  the  start  of  intervention.  After  these  exclusions,  the
study  population  consisted  of  29584  randomly  assigned
participants.  Characteristics  of  these  individuals  are  given  in
Table  2.  The  various  treatment  groups  were  well  balanced
with  regard  to  sex,  age,  smoking,  alcohol  consumption,  and
diet  and  familial  cancer  history.

Compliance  assessed  by  monthly  pill  counts  and  bio-
chemical  measures  was  excellent  throughout  the  study.  The
overall  pill  disappearance  rate  was  93%  for  all  participants,
with  no  difference  by  treatment  group  (range,  92%-93%)  and
little  change  during  the  trial  (range,  92%-93%  in  year  1;

Table  2.  General  population  trial  participant  characteristics

Participant  characteristics

No.  of  participants* 
Age  at  start  of  intervention,  y

All  participants

29584 

<50 
50-59 
*60 

Sex

Male 
Female 
Education

None 
Any 

Tobacco  (ever  smoke  cigarettes

regularly  >6  mo)
No 
Yes 

Alcohol  (any  use  past  12  mo)

Pickled  vegetable  (any  use  past  12  mo

No 
Yes 

in  winter  or  spring)
No 
Yes 

Moldy  food  (any  use  past  12  mo)

No 
Yes 

Family  history  of  esophageal  or  stomach

cancer
No 
Yes 

42% 
35% 
23% 

45% 
55% 

40% 
60% 

70% 
30% 

77% 
23% 

91% 
9% 

82% 
18% 

68% 
32% 

Range  for
individual
treatment
groups

3677-3709

42%
34%-35%
23%-24%

44%-45%
55%-56%

39%-41%
59%-61%

76%-77%
23%-24%

90%-92%
8%-10%

81%-83%
17%-19%

68%-69%
31%-32%

70%-71%
29%-30%

A
No  A

levels 

significantly  higher  nutrient  blood 

91%-92%  in  year  5).  For  86%  of  all  participants,  pill
disappearance  exceeded  90% 
(range,  85%-87%  across
treatment  groups),  while  just  5%  were  poor  compliers  (i.e.,
<50%  pill  disappearance)  (range,  5%-6%  across  treatment
groups).  Biochemical  assessments  during  the  intervention
showed 
for
individuals  who  received  supplementation  compared  with
those  who  did  not;  the  proportional  increase  was  greatest  for
beta  carotene  (Table  3).  In  contrast,  there  were  no  significant
differences 
in  baseline  levels,  except  for  lower  ascorbate
levels  in  those  who  received  vitamin  C  and  molybdenum.
A  total  of  2127  deaths  (7.2%  of  the  study  participants)
occurred  during  the  period  March  1986-May  1991.  The
percentages  of  deaths  were  higher  among  men  (9.3%)  than
women  (5.5%)  and  rose  with  age  at  start  of  follow-up  (2.3%
age  <50,  7.3% age  50-59,  and  17.3% age  5=60). Cancer  was
the  leading  cause  of  death,  accounting  for  37% of  all  deaths.
Of  the  792  cancer  deaths,  87%  (or  32%  of  all  deaths)  were
attributed 
the  esophagus  (360  deaths)  or
stomach  (331  deaths;  253  from  gastric  cardia  and  78  from
other  stomach  cancers).  There  were  101  deaths  from  other
cancers—32  from  lung  cancer,  28  from  liver  cancer,  and
fewer 
specific  malignancy.
Cerebrovascular  disease  accounted  for  523  (25%)  of  the
deaths,  while  the  remaining  812  (38%)  were  caused  by  a
variety  of  conditions,  none  of  which  accounted  for  more
than  9%  of  all  deaths.

to  cancers  of 

any  other 

than  10 

from 

Table  4  presents  numbers  of  deaths  and  the  death  rates
among  the  eight  intervention  groups  by  cause  of  death,  and
these  data  serve  as  the  basis  for  subsequent  calculations.  In
Table  5,  RRs  for  mortality  from  cancer,  cerebrovascular
disease,  and  other  diseases  associated  with  factors  A  (retinol,
zinc),  B  (riboflavin,  niacin),  C  (vitamin  C,  molybdenum).

Table  3.

Compliance  assessed  biochemically

over  the

5-year  intervention

Biochemical  assessment

Baseline*

During

intervention

Factor

No. 

Mean

SD 

No.

Mean

SD 

Pi

Retinol  ([Lg/dL,  plasma)

47
60

56
51

49
49

47
60

479
419

8.8
13.1

35.7
35.5
Riboflavin  (EGR  activation 
1.73
1.78

0.34
0.40

747
745

54.0
43.0

16.0
14.9
coefficient^
0.25
1.19
0.31
1.44

.0001

.0001

Ascorbic  acid  (mg/dL,  phuma)

0.15 
0.25 

0.13 
0.29§ 

730 
740 

0.81 
0.54 

0.47 
0.41

.0001

Beta  carotene  (\ig/dL,  plasma)

5.9 
6.8 

5.2 
5.8 

443 
455 

85.5 
12.0 

78.5 
15.0

.0001

B
No  B

C
No  C

D
No  D

*Data  missing  for  variables  other 

than  age  and  sex  on  104-109

participants,  depending  on  the  characteristic.

•Baseline  nutritional  assessment  conducted  in  May  1985;  values  adjusted

for  season.

fP  values  are  for  /  tests  of  factor  versus  no  factor  during  intervention.
tEGR  =  erythroctye  glutathione  reductase.  Lower  EGR  activation

coefficient  indicates  higher  riboflavin  status.

§/*  value  for  C  versus  no  C  at  baseline  =  .03.

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

ARTICLES  1485

Table  4.  Numbers  and  rates  of  death  by  major  disease  category  according  to  intervention  group

Cause  of

death

Cancer

Cerebrovascular

Other

Total

Intervention

group

Person-years

of

observation

No.  of
deaths

Deaths  per
1000  person-

years

No.  of
deaths

Deaths  per
1000  person-

years

Placebo
AB
AC
AD
BC
BD
CD
ABCD
Total

18626
18736
18701
18745
18686
18729
18758
18792
149773

107
94
121
81
101
103
90
95
792

5.7
5.0
6.5
4.3
5.4
5.5
4.8
5.1
5.3

77
66
71
55
60
58
67
69
523

4.1
3.5
3.8
2.9
3.2
3.1
3.6
3.7
3.5

No.  of
deaths
96
105
104
114
107
102
92
92
812

Deaths  per
1000  person-

years
5.2
5.6
5.6
6.1
5.7
5.4
4.9
4.9
5.4

No.  of
deaths

280
265
296
250
268
263
249
256
2127

Deaths  per
1000  person-

years

15.0
14.1
15.8
13.3
14.3
14.0
13.2
13.6
14.2

Table  5.  RRs  and  95%  CIs  of  death  by  cause  according  to  vitamin/mineral  factor

Cause  of  death

Total
Cancer

Esophageal
Stomach
Cardia
Noncardia

Esophageal/gastric  cardia
Other

Cerebrovascular
Other

Factor*

n

2127
792
360
331
253
78
613
101
523
812

A

B

C

D

RR

1.00
0.97
0.93
1.03
1.22
0.59
1.04
0.94
0.99
1.04

95%  CI

0.92-1.09
0.85-1.12
0.76-1.15
0.83-1.28
0.95-1.56
0.37-0.93
0.89-1.22
0.64-1.39
0.84-1.18
0.91-1.20

RR

0.97
0.98
0.90
1.00
1.03
0.94
0.95
1.24
0.93
1.00

95%  CI

0.89-1.06
0.85-1.13
0.73-1.11
0.81-1.24
0.80-1.30
0.60-1.47
0.81-1.11
0.84-1.84 
0.79-1.11
0.87-1.14 

RR

.01
.06
.05
.09
.07
.17
.06
0.98
.04
0.94

95%  CI

0.93-1.10
0.92-1.21
0.85-1.29
0.88-1.36
0.84-1.37
0.75-1.82
0.90-1.24
0.66-1.45
0.88-1.24
0.82-1.08

RR

0.91
0.87
0.96
0.79
0.82
0.72
0.90
0.80
0.90
0.96

95%  CI

0.84-0.99
0.75-1.00
0.78-1.18
0.64-0.99
0.64-1.04
0.46-1.14
0.77-1.05
0.54-1.18
0.76-1.07
0.84-1.11

*A  =  retinol,  zinc;  B  =  riboflavin,  niacin;  C  =  vitamin  C,  molybdenum;  and  D  =  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  selenium.

the 

and  D  (beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  selenium)  are  shown.
Significantly  {P  =  .03)  lower  total  mortality  rates  were
observed  among  persons  receiving  pills  with  beta  carotene,
vitamin  E,  and  selenium  (factor  D),  but  not  among  those
receiving 
three  other  vitamin/mineral  combinations.
There  was  a  9%  reduction  in  overall  mortality  (RR  =  0.91;
95%  CI  = 0.84-0.99)  among  those  receiving  factor  D.  Cancer
mortality  among  this  group  was  reduced  13%  (RR  =  0.87;
95%  CI  =  0.75-1.00),  with  esophageal/gastric  cardia  rates
reduced  10%  (RR  =  0.90;  95%  CI  =  0.77-1.05).  The
decrease  in  cancer  mortality  among  those  receiving  beta
carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium  was  more  pronounced  for
stomach  (RR  =  0.79)  and  other  (RR  =  0.80)  cancers  than  for
esophageal  cancers  (RR  =  0.96),  but  differences  between
these  RRs  were  not  significant  (/>>.10).  The  lower  risk  for
those  receiving  factor  D  was  seen  for  both  cardia  (RR  =
0.82)  and  noncardia  (RR  =  0.72)  stomach  cancers.  When  a
1-year  lag  (to  allow 
to
become  apparent)  was  incorporated 
into  the  proportional
hazards  regression  analysis,  the  differences  between  those
receiving  versus  those  not  receiving  beta  carotene,  vitamin
E,  and  selenium  became  slightly  more  pronounced:  The  RR
for  total  cancer  mortality  was  0.85  (95% CI  = 0.73-0.98);  for
stomach  cancer,  it  was  0.77  (95%  CI  =  0.61-0.98).  This  lag

time  for  an  intervention  effect 

effect  is  displayed  in  Figs.  1  and  2,  which  plot  mortality
from  total  cancer  and  stomach  cancer  by  calendar  quarter  for
those  receiving  versus  those  not  receiving  beta  carotene,
vitamin  E,  and  selenium.  Cancer  rates  overlapped  until
approximately  1  year  (total  cancer;  Fig.  1)  or  2  years
(stomach  cancer;  Fig.  2)  after  the  start  of  the  intervention
and  then 
tended  to  diverge.  None  of  the  other  factors
showed  a  progressive  benefit  of  the  kind  seen  in  Figs.  1 or
2.  Mortality  from  noncardia  stomach  cancer  was  signifi-
cantly  (f  =  .02)  lower  among  those  receiving  retinol  and
zinc,  but  cardia  cancer  rates  were  elevated  and  there  was  no
overall  reduction  in  stomach  cancer  death  rates  in  this  group.
Patterns  for  cancer  incidence  resembled  those  for  cancer
mortality  (Table  6).  In  total,  1298  persons  were  diagnosed
with  cancer  during  the  study  period.  Among  these  diagnoses,
49%  were  esophageal  cancer,  42%  were  stomach  cancer
(34%  cardia  and  8%  for  noncardia  cancers),  and  9%  were
other  cancers.  As  with 
lowered
incidences  of  total  cancer  (RR  =  0.93;  95% CI  =  0.83-1.03),
esophageal/gastric  cardia  cancer  (RR  =  0.94;  95%  CI  =
0.84-1.06),  and  stomach  cancer  (RR  =  0.84;  95%  CI  =
0.71-1.00)  were  observed  among 
receiving  beta
carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium  (Table  6).  The  reductions
for  stomach  cancer  were  equivalent  for  cardia  and  noncardia

the  mortality  findings, 

those 

1486  ARTICLES

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

t

n
e
c
r

Q.

O

2

1 -

o-

I

I 

I 
Supplementation:

BETACAR/VIT E/SE
NO  BETACAR/VIT  E/SE

1

|

i 

'

\ 

.

.

••

Fig.  1.  Cumulative  total  cancer
deaths  as  percent  of 
study
population,  March  1986-May
1991.

)

i 

i 

i

i

i

i 

i 

i

0  3  6  9  12  15  18  21  24  27  30  33  36  39  42  45  48  51  54  57  60  63

Months  of  Intervention

2

i 

r

i 

i

Supplementation:

BETACAR/VIT  E/SE
NO  BETACAR/VIT  E/SE

t

n
e
c
r
e
P

-

-**

— —"

^

Fig.  2.  Cumulative 
stomach
cancer  deaths  as  percent  of
study  population,  March  1986-
May  1991.

0  i

i

k 

i 

II 

i

ii

0  3  6  9  12  15  18  21  24  27  30  33  36  39  42  45  48  51  54  57  60  63

Months  of  Intervention

tumors.  Esophageal  cancer  incidence  was  lower  among  those
receiving  riboflavin  and  niacin  (RR  =  0.86,  95%  CI  =
0.74-1.01,  P  =  .06),  but  rates  of  gastric  cardia  cancer  were
nonsignificantly  elevated  (RR  =  1.07;  95%  CI  =  0.88-1.29).
Total  cancer  incidence  was  5%  lower  (RR  = 0.95;  95% CI  =
0.85-1.06)  among  those  receiving  versus  those  not  receiving
supplementation  with  riboflavin  and  niacin.

Discussion

The  findings  from 

trial  provide
support  for  the  hypothesis  that  intake  of  specific  micro-

this  large  randomized 

in  cancer  mortality  and 

nutrients  may  inhibit  cancer  development.  Reductions  in
total  mortality  and 
incidence,
especially  for  stomach  cancer,  were observed  over  a  5'/4-year
period  for  the  nearly  15000  individuals  who  received  daily
supplements  containing  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and
selenium.  A  reduction  in  esophageal  cancer  incidence  was
also  suggested  among  those  receiving  riboflavin  and  niacin.
No  other  nutrient  combination  demonstrated  any  clear
beneficial  effects  on  cancer  rates.

Linxian  County 

in  north-central  China  offered  unique
advantages  for  this  intervention  trial,  having  a  large  and
stable  population  with  subclinical  deficiencies  of  several

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

ARTICLES  1487

Table  6.  RRs  and  95%  CIs  of  cancer  incidence  according  to  vitamin/mineral  factor

Factor*

Type  of  cancer

Total
Esophagus
Stomach
Cardia
Noncardia

Esophageal/cardia
Other

RR

1.00
1.07
0 96
1.02
0.73
1.05
0.80

95%  Cl

0.89-1.11
0.92-1.25
0.81-1.14
0.85-1.24
0.49-1.08
0.93-1.19
0.56-1.15

RR

0.95
0.86
1.04
1.07
0.92
0.94
1.09

95%  CI

RR

0.85-1.06
0.74-1.01
0.88-1.23
0.88-1.29
0.63-1.35
0.83-1.06
0.76-1.56 

.06
.06
.10
.07
.21
.06
0.92

95%  CI

0.95-1.18
0.91-1.24
0.92-1.30
0.90-1.29
0.82-1.78
0.94-1.20
0.64-1.32

RR

0.93
1.02
0.84
0.85
0.82
0.94
0.88

95%  CI

0.83-1.03
0.87-1.19
0.71-1.00
0.70-1.02
0.56-1.20
0.84-1.06
0.62-1.27

1298
640
539
435
104
1075
119

*A  =  retinol,  zinc;  B  =  riboflavin,  niacin;  C  =  vitamin  C,  molybdenum;  and  D  =  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium.

intervention  groups  guaranteed  equity  between 

nutrients  and  an  extraordinarily  high  incidence  of  epithelial
cancers  thought  to  be  influenced  by  diet  and  nutritional
status.  The  random  allocation  within  strata  of  individuals  to
the 
the
groups  by  age  and  sex,  facilitated  balance  with  respect  to
unmeasured  factors,  and  helped  to  avoid  confounding.  The
participant  compliance  was  exceptional:  Pill  disappearance
(implying  apparent 
ingestion)  exceeded  90%,  and  blood
collections  from  randomly  selected  individuals  every  quarter
provided  biochemical  confirmation  of  excellent  compliance.
The  large  numbers  of  events—over  2100  deaths  and  nearly
1300  cancers—yielded  excellent  power  and  precise  estima-
tion  of  effects.

the  special 

features  of 

There  are  several  caveats,  however, 

that  should  be
considered  in  interpreting  the  trial  findings.  Some  concern
the  study  design.  An  advantage  of  the  factorial  design  is  the
ability  to  test  several  hypotheses  simultaneously.  However,
with  four  independent  tests  of  main  effects,  the  chance  that
one  will  be  significant  at  the  P=£.03  level  is  .11  (i.e.,  1  -
.974)  as  a  result  of  the  multiple  comparisons.  Secondly,  the
fractional  factorial  design  confounds  main  effects  with  three-
way  interaction  effects,  so  what  we  attribute  to  factor  D
might  actually  be  an  ABC  interaction.  Such  interactions  are
typically  rare  and  seem  much  less  likely  than  an  effect  due
to  a  single  factor,  however,  and  can  likely  be  dismissed.
Finally, 
the  Linxian  setting,  a
relatively  remote,  rural  area  of  China  with  a  population
marginally  deficient 
in  a  number  of  nutrients,  suggest
caution  in  extrapolating  the  findings  to  other  populations.
total
mortality,  due  mostly  to  a  lowered  risk  of  cancer,  among
those  receiving  the  combination  of  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,
and  selenium.  There  was  a  differential  effect  between
mortality  from  stomach  cancer  (21%  reduction)  and  other
cancers 
(20%  reduction)  versus  esophageal  cancer  (4%
reduction),  suggesting  that  the  benefit  may  vary  by  site  and/
or  cell  type.  However,  the  CIs  for  these  RRs  all  overlapped;
thus,  we  are 
site-specific
differences.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  noteworthy  that  the
the
stomach 
esophageal 
cell
carcinomas.

adenocarcinomas,  while 
squamous 

revealed  a  significant 

cancers  were  nearly 

reluctant 

to  emphasize 

the 

cancers  were 

This 

trial 

reduction 

in 

all 

Studies  in  experimental  animals  (6,7)  have  demonstrated
the  cancer  inhibitory  properties  of  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,

and  selenium.  For  example,  beta  carotene  has 
inhibited
formation  of  UV-induced  skin  cancers,  oral  carcinomas
caused  by  dimethylbenzanthracene  exposure,  and  colon
tumors  that  develop  following  dimethylhydrazine  exposure.
Vitamin  E  and  selenium  have  also  lowered  the  incidence  of
tumors  in  a  number  of  experiments  involving  exposure  to
different  carcinogens,  although  some  studies  (6,7)  suggested
either  no effect  or  enhancement  of  carcinogenesis.  Vitamin  E
has  been  shown  to  inhibit  nitrosamine-induced  esophageal
cancer  in  mice  (75).

The  epidemiologic  evidence 

is  also  consistent  with  a
beneficial  role  of  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium  on
cancer  risk  (5,6).  It  has  repeatedly  been  shown  that  intake  of
fresh  fruits  and  vegetables  is  associated  with  reduced  risks
of  esophageal,  stomach,  and  total  cancer  (5).  Risks  among
persons  having  the  highest  intakes  often  are  as  low  as  one
half  of  those  having  the  lowest  intakes  for  several  foods,
especially  citrus  and  other  fruits  and  fresh  green,  orange,  and
yellow  vegetables.  Although  it  has  been  difficult  to  identify
specific  components  of  these  foods  that  may  be  responsible
for  the  decreased  risk,  a  role  for  beta  carotene  and  possibly
other  carotenoids  has  been  suggested  by  case-control  studies
of  esophageal  and  stomach  cancers,  including  studies  in
China  (5,6,16-18).  Difficulty  in  estimating  dietary  intakes  of
vitamin  E  and  selenium  has  limited  evaluation  of  their
effects.  However,  in  Italy,  the  largest  case-control  study  (19)
of  stomach  cancer  conducted  to  date  found  that  risks  of
cancers  of  the  stomach,  including  gastric  cardia,  were  more
closely  correlated  with  an  index  of  dietary  vitamin  E  than  of
beta  carotene,  although  the  opposite  pattern  was  reported  in
Canada  (20).

Further  supporting  evidence  for  a  protective  effect  of  beta
carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium  comes  from  observations
of  inverse  associations  of  blood  levels  of  these  nutrients  with
risk  of  several  cancers,  including  those  of  the  esophagus  and
stomach.  Ecologic  surveys  (21-23)  across  rural  Chinese
counties  found  that  plasma  levels  of  selenium  were  inversely
correlated  with  mortality  rates  for  both  esophageal  and
stomach  cancers,  while  plasma  beta  carotene  was  signifi-
cantly  lower  in  counties  with  high  stomach  cancer  rates.  In
Linxian,  blood  levels  of  beta  carotene  and  alpha-tocopherol
are  consistently  lower  than  Western  norms,  while  levels  of
selenium  are  near  normal  or  only  marginally  lower  (8-11).  In
evaluation  of  nutrients 
in  stored  sera  for  persons  who

1488  ARTICLES

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

subsequently  developed  stomach  cancer,  prediagnostic  levels
of  serum  beta  carotene  were  depressed  in  studies  in  the
United  States,  Great  Britain,  and  Switzerland  (24).  Dif-
ferences  with  respect  to  serum  vitamin  E  and  selenium  in
these  studies  were  less  pronounced.  A  study  in  Finland  (25),
however, 
selenium  were
significantly 
in  men  who  subsequently  developed
stomach  cancer.

levels  of 

serum 

found 

lower 

that 

Only  a  few  observational  studies  have  evaluated  risk  of
cancer  in  relation  to  use  of  vitamin  or  mineral  supplements.
In  a  U.S.  hospital-based  study  (26)  of  133  male  esophageal
cancer  patients,  risk  was  50%  lower  among  users  of  vitamin
E  supplements.  A  50%  reduction  in  risk  of  oral  cancer  also
was  reported  among  users  of  vitamin  E  supplements  in  a
national  study 
that  enrolled  over  1000  American
patients.

(27) 

Several  clinical  trials  have  shown  beneficial  effects  of
beta  carotene  or  vitamin  E  on  precancerous  lesions.  In  a  20-
month  randomized  trial  in  Uzbekistan  (28),  daily  doses  of  40
mg  of  beta  carotene  together  with  weekly  supplements  of
100000  IU  of  retinol  and  80  mg  of  vitamin  E  were
associated  with  endoscopically  determined  regression  of
chronic  esophagitis  (although  the  effect  was  not  statistically
significant) 
in  oral
leukoplakia.  Several  other  trials  (29-31)  have  also  reported
reversals  in  oral  leukoplakia,  thought  to  be  a  precursor  to
oral  cancer,  following  supplementation  with  beta  carotene  or
vitamin  E.  Furthermore,  beta  carotene  combined  with  retinol
lowered  the  frequency  of  buccal  micronuclei  among  betel
chewers  in  the  Philippines  (32),  while  beta  carotene  alone
reduced  the  prevalence  of  micronuclei 
in  the  sputum  of
smokers  in  the  Netherlands  (55).

and  with  a  significant 

reduction 

trial 

trial 

No  other  randomized  clinical  trials  have  reported  on  the
effects  on  esophageal  or  stomach  cancers  of  supplementation
with  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  or  selenium.  In  the  only
reported  cancer 
(34),  daily  50-mg  beta  carotene
supplementation  was  not  found  to  be  effective  in  inhibiting
second  primary  basal  or  squamous  cell  skin  cancers  among
patients  with  nonmelanoma  skin  cancer.  In 
the  smaller
parallel 
that  we  conducted  among  persons  with
esophageal  dysplasia  in  Linxian,  described  in  a  companion
paper  (12),  total  cancer  mortality  and  incidence  rates  were
similar  between  those  receiving  6  years  of  supplementation
with  26  vitamins  and  minerals  (including  beta  carotene,
vitamin  E,  and  selenium)  and  those  receiving  placebo.  Inter-
vention  trials  involving  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and/or
selenium  and  assessing  cancer  end  points  are  ongoing  in
populations  in  the  United  States  and  Finland.  Although  the
numbers  of  esophageal  or  stomach  cancers  likely  to  arise  in
these  trials  will  be  considerably  smaller  than  in  Linxian,
evaluation  of  the  effects  of  supplementation  on  these  cancers
should  be  possible.

The  mechanisms  by  which  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  or
selenium  inhibit  cancer  development  are  not  clear,  but  might
involve  their  antioxidant  properties  (6).  These  compounds,
especially  beta  carotene,  can  quench  free  radicals  and  protect
against  oxidative  damage  to  DNA.  The  nutrients  also  inhibit
the  endogenous  formation  of  N-nitroso  compounds,  some  of
which  are  potent  carcinogens  in  animal  experiments  and  are

suspected  risk  factors  for  stomach  and  esophageal  cancers  in
human  populations,  including  Linxian's  (35,36).  Beta  car-
otene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium  may  also  possess  immu-
nologic  and  other  properties  that  influence  carcinogenesis
(6).  We  could  not  directly  evaluate  mechanistic  pathways,
although  we  are  currently 
in
cytologically  and  endoscopically  determined  precancerous
lesions  as  well  as  immune  function  by  treatment  group.

assessing  differences 

to 

in  noncardia 

recent  analytic  studies  have 

find  significant  protective  effects  on 

its  analogues  have  enhanced  carcinogenesis 

Despite  its  high  (90%)  power  to  detect  reductions  of  14%
and  23% in  total  and  cancer  mortality,  respectively,  the  trial
failed 
total,
esophageal,  or  stomach  cancer  mortality  during  the  5!/4-year
supplementation  period  for  retinol  and  zinc,  riboflavin  and
niacin,  or  vitamin  C  and  molybdenum.  A 
significant
reduction 
stomach  cancer  mortality  was
observed  among  those  receiving  retinol  and  zinc,  but  it  was
counterbalanced  by  an  increase 
in  gastric  cardia  cancer
mortality  in  this  group.  A  potential  benefit  of  retinol  on
cancer  risk  has  been  postulated  on  the  basis  of  its  role  in
maintaining  cell 
integrity  and  on  the  ability  of  certain
retinoids  to  inhibit  chemically  induced  tumors  in  laboratory
animals,  although  in  some  experimental  models,  vitamin  A
and 
(6).
Epidemiologic  support  for  a  beneficial  effect  of  vitamin  A,
although  suggestive  at  one  time,  has  waned  since  the  trial
began.  Several 
found  no
evidence  of  a protective  effect  of  dietary  or  serum  retinol  for
esophageal  or  stomach  cancers,  with  the  consensus  suggest-
ing  that  benefits  are  associated  with  the  vitamin  A  precursor
beta  carotene  (37).  In  clinical  trials  (38),  however,  high
isotretinoin  have  proven
doses  of  the  synthetic  retinoid 
incidence  of  second  primary
effective 
cancers  of 
in  oral  cancer  patients.
Although  human  data  on  the  relationship  between  zinc  and
cancer  are  limited,  zinc  was  included  because  it  enhances
delivery  of  retinol  to  body  tissues  and  because  esophageal
carcinogenesis  is  promoted  in  zinc-deficient  rats  (39).  It  is
noteworthy 
that  in  a  randomized  trial  (40)  in  a  county
neighboring  Linxian,  13  months  of  supplementation  with
retinol  (50000  IU  per  week)  and  zinc  (50  mg  per  week)
along  with  high  doses  (200  mg  per  week)  of  riboflavin  had
no  effect  on  the  prevalence  of  precancerous  esophageal
lesions.  The  frequencies  of  buccal  micronuclei  also  were
similar 
treated  and  placebo  groups,  although
esophageal  micronuclei  were  reduced  following  supplemen-
tation  with  retinol,  zinc,  and  riboflavin  (41).

the  head  and  neck 

in  reducing 

the 

in 

the 

One  of  the  characteristics  of  areas  of  the  world  (e.g.,
Linxian  and  parts  of  Iran  and  South  Africa)  with  markedly
elevated  esophageal  cancer  rates  is  low  dietary  intake  of  B
vitamins,  particularly  riboflavin  and  niacin  (42).  Indeed,
riboflavin  status  as  measured  by  erythrocyte  glutathione
reductase  activity  was  severely  depressed  in  Linxian  when
compared  with  the  United  States;  over  90%  of  the  Linxian
population  was  termed  deficient 
(8-11).
Riboflavin  deficiencies  have  induced  esophageal  hyperplasia
in  baboons  and  altered 
the  metabolism  of  nitrosamines
(43,44).  Supplementation  with  riboflavin  and  niacin,  along
with  zinc,  magnesium,  and  molybdenum,  inhibited  esopha-
geal  carcinogenesis  in  corn-fed  rats  (45).  In  Uzbekistan,

in  this  nutrient 

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

ARTICLES  1489

in  esophageal  cancer 

riboflavin  and  niacin  supplements,  with 

however,  supplementation  with  riboflavin  for  20  months  was
not  successful 
in  reversing  chronic  esophagitis  (28).  We
found  that  esophageal  cancer  incidence  and  mortality  were
14%  and  10%  lower,  respectively,  among  those  receiving
daily 
the  14%
reduction 
incidence  of  borderline
statistical  significance.  Total  cancer  incidence  or  mortality,
however,  was  only  slightly  reduced  among  those  receiving  B
vitamin  supplementation,  thus  providing  only  weak  support
for  a  protective  effect.  On  the  other  hand,  the  limited  a
priori  evidence  suggests  that  a  benefit  from  riboflavin  and
niacin  may  be  more  pronounced  for  esophageal  cancer.
Thus,  we  view  the  finding  of  lowered  esophageal  cancer
incidence  as  an  encouraging  sign  worthy  of  additional
investigation.

Vitamin  C  has  been  suggested  as  protective  against
several  cancers,  particularly  stomach  cancer  (6).  Although
results  of  experimental  studies  are  mixed,  most  case-control
studies  of  stomach  and  esophageal  cancers  have  shown  that
adult  diets  of  the  patients  typically  are  low  in  intake  of
vitamin  C-containing 
inhibit
endogenous  formation  of  nitrosamines,  and  it  has  antioxidant
and  other  biological  properties 
inhibit
carcinogenesis  (46).  Data  from  the  Linxian  trial,  however,
showed  no evidence  of  reduced  cancer  mortality  or  incidence
(in  fact,  the  RRs  were  above  1.0)  among  persons  receiving
daily  vitamin  C  and  molybdenum  supplements  at  doses
approximately  twice  the  U.S.  RDAs.

(5).  Vitamin  C  can 

that  may  also 

foods 

to 

the  shortness 

(5!/4  years)  of 

The  failure  of  this  trial  to  find  significant  reductions  in
cancer  mortality  among  those  supplemented  with  retinol  and
zinc,  riboflavin  and  niacin,  or  vitamin  C  and  molybdenum
could  be  related 
the
intervention  and  follow-up.  Indeed,  if  these  nutrients  had  a
protective  effect  on  the  early  stages  of  carcinogenesis,  our
focus  on  concurrent  events  in  adults  taking  the  supplements
would  not  be  expected  to  show  a  mortality  differential.  The
data  suggest  only  that  supplementation  with  these  particular
nutrients  resulted  in  no  demonstrable  short-term  mortality
benefit.  Continued  monitoring  of 
the  participants  will
determine  whether  any  reductions  in  cancer  or  other  disease
may  emerge  in  the  coming  years.

from  cerebrovascular  disease  was  10% 

Several  reports  have  suggested  that  antioxidant  nutrients
may  reduce 
the  risk  or  progression  of  cerebrovascular
disease,  a  common  cause  of  death  in  Linxian,  and  perhaps
lower  the  rate  of  hypertension,  a  strong  risk  factor  (6,47-49).
We  found  no  significant  treatment  group  differences,  but
mortality 
lower
among  those  receiving  supplements  with  the  antioxidants
beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium.  Although  the  effects
of  antioxidants  on  cerebrovascular  disease  may  be  caused  by
ischemia,
limiting  neuronal 
evidence 
inhibit
atherosclerosis,  especially  of 
the  coronary  vessels,  by
reducing  the  oxidation  of  low-density  lipoproteins  (50).  A
lowered  risk  of  cardiovascular  disease  has  been  reported
among  American  men  and  women 
taking  vitamin  E
supplements  (51,52).  Furthermore, 
trial
among  U.S.  physicians  (53),  beta  carotene  was  found  to
reduce  by  44%  the  risk  of  major  coronary  events  in  the

tissue  damage  from  cerebral 

that  antioxidants  may 

in  a  randomized 

is  accumulating 

subset  of  participants  with  chronic  angina.  Elsewhere,
plasma  levels  of  carotene  and  vitamins  E  and  C  have  been
inversely  related  to  risk  of  angina  (54).  Only  1%  of  the
deaths  among  Linxian  trial  participants  were  attributed  to
ischemic  heart  disease,  limiting  evaluation  of  intervention
effects,  but  we  found  little  or  no  reduction  in  mortality  from
cardiovascular  disease  among  those  receiving  beta  carotene,
vitamin  E,  and  selenium.

the  Linxian 

In  summary,  when 

trial  observations  are
combined  with  the  epidemiologic,  experimental,  and  biolog-
ical  evidence  at  hand,  it  seems  plausible  that  the  lowered
cancer  rates  represent  a  protective  effect  of  beta  carotene,
vitamin  E,  and  selenium  intervention.  Although  pill  supple-
mentation  ceased  in  the  summer  of  1991, continued  follow-
up  of  the  Linxian  participants  over  the  coming  years  is
planned.  In  this  manner,  persistence  of  the  lowered  mortality
associated  with  beta  carotene,  vitamin  E,  and  selenium  and
the  reduced  esophageal  cancer  incidence  associated  with
riboflavin  and  niacin  can  be  evaluated  along  with 
the
potential 
long-term  effects  of  each  of  the  four  nutrient
combinations  after  intervention.  Shorter-term  trials  are  also
planned  in  the  context  of  a  gastric  screening  project  in
another  high-risk  area  of  China  to  assess  the  effectiveness  of
beta  carotene  versus  vitamin  E  versus  selenium  in  inhibiting
transitions 
intestinal
metaplasia  and  gastric  dysplasia.  Thus,  while  the  Linxian
results  should  be  considered  preliminary  in  nature,  they  offer
a  hopeful  sign  that  vitamin/mineral  supplementation  may
lower  the  risk  of  certain  cancers  and  suggest  lines  of  further
research 
specific
micronutrients.

from  chronic  atrophic  gastritis 

the  protective  effects  of 

to  evaluate 

to 

References
(/)  Li  JY:  Epidemiology  of  esophageal  cancer  in  China.  Monogr  Natl

Cancer  Inst  62:113-120,  1982

(2)  Blot  WJ,  Li  JY:  Some  considerations  in  the  design  of  a  nutrition
intervention  trial  in  Linxian,  People's  Republic  of  China.  Monogr  Natl
Cancer  Inst  69:29-34,  1985

(3)  Li  JY,  Ershow  AG,  Chen  ZJ,  et  al:  A  case-control  study  of  cancer  of
the  esophagus  and  gastric  cardia  in  Linxian.  Int  J  Cancer  43:755-761,
1989

(4)  Yu  Y,  Taylor  PR,  Li  JY,  et  al:  Retrospective  cohort  study  of  risk
factors  for  esophageal  cancer  in  Linxian,  China.  Cancer  Causes
Control  3:203-208,  1993

(5)  Steinmetz  KA,  Potter  JD:  Vegetables,  fruit,  and  cancer.  I.  Epidemiol-

ogy.  Cancer  Causes  Control  2:325-357,  1991

(6)  National  Research  Council:  Diet  and  Health: 

for
Reducing  Chronic  Disease  Risk.  Washington,  DC:  National  Academy
Press,  1989

Implications 

(7)  Bin  DF:  Update  on  the  effects  of  vitamins  A,  C,  and  E  and  selenium

on  carcinogenesis.  Proc  Soc  Exp  Biol  Med  183:311-320,  1986

(8)  Yang  CS,  Miao  J,  Yang  W,  et  al:  Diet  and  vitamin  nutrition  of  the
high  esophageal  cancer  risk  population  in  Linxian,  China.  Nutr  Cancer
4:154-164,  1982

(9)  Yang  CS,  Sun  Y,  Yang  Q,  et  al:  Vitamin  A  and  other  deficiencies  in
Linxian,  a  high  esophageal  cancer  incidence  area  in  northern  China.
JNCI  73:1449-1453,  1984

(10)  Thurnham  DI,  Zheng  SF,  Mufloz  N,  et  al:  Comparison  of  riboflavin,
vitamin  A,  and  zinc  status  of  Chinese  populations  at  high  and  low  risk
for  esophageal  cancer.  Nutr  Cancer  7:131-143,  1985

(//)  Zheng  SF,  Ershow  AG,  Yang  CS,  et  al:  Nutritional  status  in  Linxian,
China:  effects  of  season  and  supplementation.  Int  J  Vitam  Nutr  Res
59:190-199,  1989

(12)  Li  JY,  Taylor  PR,  Li  B,  et  al:  Nutrition  intervention  trials  in  Linxian,
China:  multiple  vitamin/mineral  supplementation,  cancer  incidence,

1490  ARTICLES

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

and  disease-specific  mortality  among  adults  with  esophageal  dysplasia.
J  Natl  Cancer  Inst  85:1492-1498,  1993

(13)  Davies  OL:  Design  and  Analysis  of  Industrial  Experiments.  New

York:  Hafner,  1963

(14)  Breslow  NE,  Day  NE:  Statistical  Methods  in  Cancer  Research  II.  The
Design  and  Analysis  of  Cohort  Studies.  IARC  Sci  Publ  82,  Lyon,
1987,  pp  1-406

(15)  Odeleye  OE,  Eskelson  CD,  Mufti  SI,  et  al:  Vitamin  E  protection
against  nitrosamine-induced  esophageal 
in  mice
immunocorapromised  by  retroviral  infection.  Carcinogenesis  13:1811-
1816,  1992

incidence 

tumor 

(16)  You  WC,  Blot  WJ,  Chang  YS, et  al:  Diet  and  the  high  risk  of  stomach

cancer  in  Shandong,  China.  Cancer  Res  48:3518-3523,  1988

(17)  Hu  J,  Zhang  S,  Jia  E,  et  al:  Diet  and  cancer  of  the  stomach:  a  case-

control  study  in  China.  Int  J  Cancer  41:331-335,  1988

(IS)  Cheng  KK,  Day  NE,  Duffy  SW,  et  al:  Pickled  vegetables  in  the
aetiology  of  oesophageal  cancer  in  Hong  Kong  Chinese.  Lancet
339:1314-1318,  1992

(19)  Buiatti  E,  Palli  D,  Decarli  A,  et  al:  A  case-control  study  of  gastric
cancer  and  diet  in  Italy:  II.  Association  with  nutrients.  Int  J  Cancer
45:896-901,  1990

(20)  Risen  HA,  Jain  M,  Choi  NW,  et  al:  Dietary  factors  and  the  incidence

of  cancer  of  the  stomach.  Am  J  Epidemiol  122:947-959,  1985

(2/)  Yu  SY,  Chu  Y,  Gang  XL,  et  al:  Regional  variation  of  cancer  mortality
and  its  relation  to  selenium  levels  in  China.  Biol  Trace  Elem  Res
7:21-29,  1985

(22)  Kneller  RW,  Guo  WD,  Hsing  AW,  et  al:  Risk  factors  for  stomach
cancer  in  sixty-five  Chinese  counties.  Cancer  Epidemiol  Biomarkers
Prev  1:113-118,  1992

(23)  Guo  W,  Li  JY,  Blot  WJ,  et  al:  Correlations  of  dietary  intake  and
blood  nutrient  levels  with  esophageal  cancer  mortality  in  China.  Nutr
Cancer  13:121-127,  1990

(24)  Comstock  GW,  Bush  TL,  Helzlsouer  K:  Serum  retinol,  beta-carotene,
vitamin  E,  and  selenium  as  related  to  subsequent  cancer  of  specific
sites.  Am  J  Epidemiol  135:115-121,  1992

(25)  Knekt  P,  Aromaa  A,  Maatela  J,  et  al:  Serum  selenium  and  subsequent
risk  of  cancer  among  Finnish  men  and  women.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst
82:864-868,  1990

(26)  Barone  J,  Taioli  E,  Herbert  JR,  et  al:  Vitamin  supplement  use  and  risk

for  oral  and  esophageal  cancer.  Nutr  Cancer  18:31-41,  1992

(27)  Gridley  G,  McLaughlin  JK,  Block  G,  et  al:  Vitamin  supplement  use
and  reduced  risk  of  oral  and  pharyngeal  cancer.  Am  J  Epidemiol
135:1083-1092,  1992

(28)  Zaridze  D,  Evstifeeva  T,  Boyle  P:  Chemoprevention  of  oral
leukoplakia  and  chronic  esophagitis  in  an  area  of  high  incidence  of
oral  and  esophageal  cancer.  Ann  Epidemiol  3:225-234,  1993

(29)  Garewal  HS,  Meyskens  FL  Jr,  Killen  D,  et  al:  Response  of  oral

leukoplakia  to  beta-carotene.  J  Clin  Oncol  8:1715-1720,  1990

(50)  Stich  HF,  Rosin  MP,  Hornby  AP:  Remission  of  oral  leukoplakias  and
micronuclei  in  tobacco/betel  quid  chewers  treated  with  beta-carotene
and  with  beta-carotene  plus  vitamin  A.  Int  J  Cancer  42:195-199,  1988
(37)  Benner  SE,  Winn  RJ,  Lippman  SM,  et  al:  Regression  of  oral
leukoplakia  with  ot-tocopherol:  A  community  clinical  oncology
program  chemoprevention  study.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst  85:44—47,  1993
(32)  Stich  HF,  Rosin  MP,  Vallejera  MO:  Reduction  with  vitamin  A  and
beta-carotene  administration  of  proportion  of  micronucleated  buccal
mucosal  cells  in  Asian  betal  nut  and  tobacco  chewers.  Lancet  1:1204—
1206,  1984

(33)  van  Poppel  G,  Kok  FJ,  Hermus  RJ:  Beta-carotene  supplementation  in
smokers  reduces  the  frequency  of  micronuclei  in  sputum.  Br  J  Cancer
66:1164-1168,  1992

(34)  Greenberg  ER:  A  clinical  trial  of  beta  carotene  to  prevent  basal<ell
and  squamous-cell  cancers  of  the  skin.  The  Skin  Cancer  Prevention
Study  Group  [published  erratum  appears  in  N  Engl  J  Med  325:1324,
1991].  N  Engl  J  Med  323:789-795,  1990

(35)  Mirvish  SS:  The  etiology  of  gastric  cancer:  intragastric  nitrosamide

formation  and  other  theories.  JNC1  71:629-647,  1983

(36)  Yang  CS:  Research  on  esophageal  cancer  in  China:  a  review.  Cancer

Res  40:2633-2644,  1980

(37)  Mayne  ST,  Graham  S,  Zheng  TZ:  Dietary  retinol:  prevention  or
promotion  of  carcinogenesis  in  humans?  [published  erratum  appears  in
Cancer  Causes  Control  3:184,  1992].  Cancer  Causes  Control  2:443-
450,  1991

(38)  Hong  WK,  Lippman  S,  Itri  LM,  et  al:  Prevention  of  second  primary
tumors  with  isotretinoin  in  squamous-cell  carcinoma  of  the  head  and
neck.  N  Engl  J  Med  323:795-801,  1990

(39)  Gabrial  GN,  Schrager  TF,  Newbeme  PM:  Zinc  deficiency,  alcohol,

and  retinoid:  association  with  esophageal  cancer  in  rats. JNCI  68:785-
789,  1982

(40)  Mufioz  N,  Wahrendorf  J,  Bang  LJ,  et  al:  No  effect  of  riboflavine,
retinol,  and  zinc  on  prevalence  of  precancerous  lesions  of  oesophagus.
Randomised  double-blind  intervention  study  in  high-risk  population  of
China.  Lancet  2:111-114,  1985

(41)  Mufioz  N,  Hayashi  M,  Bang  LJ, et  al:  Effect  of  riboflavin,  retinol,  and
zinc  on  micronuclei  of  buccal  mucosa  and  of  esophagus:  a  randomized
double-blind  intervention  study  in  China.  JNCI  79:687-691,  1987

(42)  van  Rensburg  SJ:  Epidemiologic  and  dietary  evidence  for  a  specific
to  esophageal  cancer.  JNCI  67:243-251,

nutritional  predisposition 
1981

(43)  Foy  H,  Kondi  A:  The  vulnerable  esophagus:  riboflavin  deficiency  and
squamous  cell  dysplasia  of  the  skin  and  esophagus.  JNCI  72:941-948,
1984

(44)  Wang  T,  Miller  KW,  Tu  YY,  et  al:  Effects  of  riboflavin  deficiency  on
metabolism  of  nitrosamines  by  rat  liver  microsomes.  JNCI  74:1291—
1297,  1985

(45)  Van  Rensburg  SJ,  Hall  JM,  Gathercole  PS:  Inhibition  of  esophageal
carcinogenesis  in  corn-fed  rats  by  riboflavin,  nicotinic  acid,  selenium,
molybdenum,  zinc,  and  magnesium.  Nutr  Cancer  8:163—170,  1986

(46)  Henson  DE,  Block  G,  Levine  M:  Ascorbic  acid:  biologic  functions

and  relation  to  cancer.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst  83:547-550,  1991

(47)  Acheson  RM,  Williams  DR:  Does  consumption  of  fruit  and  vegetables

protect  against  stroke?  Lancet  1:1191-1193,  1983

(48)  Salonen  JT:  Dietary  fats,  antioxidants  and  blood  pressure.  Ann  Med

(49)  Bulpitt  CJ:  Vitamin  C  and  blood  pressure.  J  Hypertens  8:1071-1075,

23:295-298,  1991

1990

(50)  Steinberg  D:  Antioxidants  in  the  prevention  of  human  atherosclerosis.
Summary  of  the  proceedings  of  a  National  Heart,  Lung,  and  Blood
Institute  Workshop-  September  5-6,  1991,  Bethesda,  Md.  Circulation
85:2338-2345,  1992

(5/)  Stampfer  MJ,  Hennekens  CH,  Manson  JE,  et  al:  Vitamin  E
consumption  and  the  risk  of  coronary  disease  in  women.  N  Engl  J
Med  328:1444-1449,  1993

(52)  Rimm  EB,  Stampfer  MJ,  Ascherio  A,  et  al:  Vitamin  E  consumption
and  the  risk  of  coronary  heart  disease  in  men.  N  Engl  J  Med
328:1450-1456,  1993

(53)  Gaziano  JM,  Manson  J,  Ridke  P,  et  al:  Beta<arotene  therapy  for
chronic  stable  angina.  Circulation  82  (Suppl  III):201,  1990  (abstract)
(54)  Riemersma  RA,  Wood  DA,  Macintyre  CC,  et  al:  Rise  of  angina
pectoris  and  plasma  concentrations  of  vitamins  A,  C,  and  E  and
carotene.  Lancet  337:1-5,  1991

Notes

Affiliations  of  authors:  W.  J.  Blot,  P.  R.  Taylor,  S.  Dawsey,  M.  Gail,  J.

Tangrea,  J.  F.  Fraumeni,  Jr.,  National  Cancer  Institute,  Bethesda,  Md.

J.-Y.  Li,  W.  Guo,  G.-Q.  Wang,  S.-F.  Zheng,  G.-Y.  Li,  Y.  Yu,  B.  Liu,  Y.
Sun,  F.  Liu,  Y.-H.  Zhang,  B.  Li,  Cancer  Institute,  Chinese  Academy  of
Medical  Sciences,  Beijing,  People's  Republic  of  China.

C.  S.  Yang,  Rutgers  University,  Piscataway,  NJ.
Correspondence  to:  William  J.  Blot,  Ph.D., Biostatistics  Branch,  Division
of  Cancer  Etiology,  National  Cancer  Institute,  6130  Executive  Blvd.,
Rockville,  MD  20852.

We  thank  the  Linxian  residents  who participated  in  the  trials,  the  Linxian
county  government, 
the  Linxian  People's  Hospital,  and  the  commune
hospitals  in  Yaocun,  Rencun,  Donggang,  and  Hengshui  for  support.  For
guidance  and  dedicated  field  and  laboratory  work  in  carrying  out  the
investigation,  we  thank  Drs.  Shihxin  Lu,  Kan  Yang,  Wen  Wang,  Xiao-nong
Zou,  Shufan  Liu,  Quping  Yang,  Guchen  Yang,  and  Zhijian  Chen  of  the
Cancer  Institute,  Chinese  Academy  of  Medical  Sciences,  and  Qiong  Shen  of
the  Henan  Medical  University.  For  expert  assistance  in  data  management
and  processing,  we  thank  Linda  Cranston,  Jack  Cahill,  Suzanne  Huang
Rexing,  Linda  Lannom,  Anell  Bond,  Eric  Mehl,  Walt  Hufford,  Erika
Wilson,  Shelly  Niwa,  Cathy  Agar,  and  Drew  Nuland  of  Westat,  Inc.  For
scientific  advice  and  support  we  thank  Drs.  Peter  Greenwald,  Steven  Mark,
Christine  Swanson,  and  B. J.  Stone  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute  and  Dr.
Abby  Ershow  of  the  National  Heart,  Lung  and  Blood  Institute.  For  expert
advice  and  review  of  diagnostic  materials  we  thank  Drs.  Klaus  Lewin,
Roberta  Nieberg,  Marvin  Weiner,  and  Wilfred  Weinstein 
the
University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles  and  Dr.  Zheng-Yan  Wang  from  the
Cancer  Institute,  Chinese  Academy  of  Medical  Sciences.  For  expert  advice,
suggestions,  and  review  during  the  trials,  we  thank  Dr.  Paul  Engstrom  of

from 

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

ARTICLES  1491

the  Fox  Chase  Cancer  Center  (Philadelphia,  Pa.),  Dr.  Pelayo  Correa  of  the  Hoffmann-La  Roche  for  assistance  in  the  provision  of  the  vitamin/mineral
Louisiana  State  University  (New  Orleans),  and  Dr.  Stephen  Lagakos  of  the 
Harvard  School  of  Public  Health  (Boston,  Mass.),  who  served  on  the  Data 
thank 
Safety  and  Monitoring  Committee.  We  also  acknowledge  and 

Manuscript  received  February  19,  1993,  revised  June  22,  1993;  accepted

July  1,  1993.

supplements.

Nutrition  Intervention  Trials  in  Linxian,  China:
Multiple  Vitamin/Mineral  Supplementation,
Cancer  Incidence,  and  Disease-Specific  Mortality
Among  Adults  With  Esophageal  Dysplasia

Jun-Yao  Li,  Philip  R.  Taylor,  Bing  Li,  Sanford  Dawsey,
Guo-Qing  Wang,  Abby  G.  Ershow,  Wande  Guo,  Shu-Fan  Liu,
Chung  S.  Yang,  Qiong  Shen,  Wen  Wang,  Steven  D.  Mark,
Xiao-Nong  Zou,  Peter  Greenwald,  Yang-Ping  Wu,  William  J.  Blot*

Background:  A  number  of  vitamins  and  minerals  have
been  shown  to  influence  carcinogenesis  in  experimental
animals.  In  humans,  epidemiologic  evidence  suggests  that
intake  of  fruits  and  vegetables  may  reduce  risk  of
esophageal  and  other  cancers.  Vitamins  and  minerals  in
these  foods  may  contribute  to  the  reduced  cancer  risk.
The  people  of  Linxian,  China,  have  persistently 
low
intake  of  multiple  nutrients  and  exhibit  one  of  the
world's  highest  rates  of  esophageal/gastric  cardia  cancer,
with  an  exceptionally  high  risk  of  esophageal  dysplasia.
Purpose:  To  determine  whether  supplementation  with
multiple  vitamins  and  minerals  may  reduce  esophageal/
gastric  cardia  cancer  among  persons  with  esophageal
dysplasia,  we  conducted  a  6-year  prospective  intervention
trial  in  Linxian.  Methods:  Mortality  and  cancer  incidence
were  ascertained  from  May  1985  through  May  1991  for
3318  persons  with  cytologic  evidence  of  esophageal
dysplasia  who  were  randomly  assigned 
to  receive,
throughout  that  period,  daily  supplementation  with  14
vitamins  and  12  minerals  or  placebo.  Doses  were
typically  two  to  three  times  U.S.  Recommended  Daily
Allowances.  Compliance  was  assessed  by  counting  unused
pills  monthly  for  all  trial  participants  and  by  assaying
nutrient 
from  samples  of
individuals  randomly  selected  without  replacement  every
3  months  throughout  the  trial.  Cancers  were  identified
through  routine  surveillance  and  by  special  cytology  and
endoscopy  screenings  after  2lA years  and  6 years.  Results:
A  total  of  324  deaths  occurred  during  the  6-year  inter-
vention  period;  167  occurred  in  the  control  (placebo)
group  and  157  occurred  in  the  supplement  group.  Cancer
was  the  leading  cause  of  death  (54%  of  all  deaths);  18%
were  due  to  cerebrovascular  diseases  and  29%  to  other
causes.  Cumulative  esophageal/gastric  cardia  death  rates
were  8% 
[RR]  =  0.92;  95%
confidence  interval  [CI]  =  0.67-1.28)  among  individuals

in  blood  collected 

(relative  risk 

levels 

lower 

receiving  supplements  rather  than  placebo,  a  nonsignifi-
cant  (P>.IO)  difference.  Risk  of  total  mortality  was  7%
lower  (RR  =  0.93;  95%  CI  =  0.75-1.16;  P>.10), 
total
cancer  4%  lower  (RR  =  0.96;  95%  CI  =  0.71-1.29;
P>.10),  cerebrovascular  disease  38%  lower  (RR  =  0.62;
95%  CI  =  0J7-1.06;  P  =  .08),  and  other  diseases  12%
higher  (RR  =  1.12;  95%  CI  =  0.74-1.69;  P>.10)  among
the  treated  group.  Cumulative  cancer  incidence  rates
were  nearly  the  same  in  the  two  groups.  Conclusions:  No
substantial  short-term  beneficial  effect  on  incidence  or
mortality  for  this  type  of  cancer  occurred  following  daily
supplementation  with  multiple  vitamins  and  minerals
among  adults  with  precancerous  lesions  of  the  esophagus.
Implications:  Although  no  statistically  significant  short-
term  benefits  were  observed,  longer  follow-up  should  be
more  informative  about  the  effectiveness  of  this  6-year
supplementation  on  cancer  and  other  diseases  among
individuals  with  esophageal  dysplasia.  [J  Natl  Cancer
Inst  85:1492-1498,  1993]

Rates  of  esophageal/gastric  cardia  cancer  in  Linxian,  a
rural  county  in  Henan  Province,  north-central  China,  are
among  the  highest  in  the  world  (7).  The  excess  risk  is
especially  pronounced  among  persons  with  esophageal
dysplasia,  a precancerous  lesion  affecting  over  20% of  adults
in  this  area  (2,5).  The  excess  cancers  occur  not  only  as
squamous  cell  carcinomas  of  the  esophagus,  but  also  as
adenocarcinomas  of  the  gastric  cardia.  Traditionally,  both
tumors  have  been  called  "esophageal  cancer"  in  Linxian
because  of  their  proximity  to  one  another  and  similarity  in
symptoms.

*See  "Notes"  section  following  "References."

1492  ARTICLES

Journal  of  the  National  Cancer  Institute,  Vol.  85,  No.  18,  September  15,  1993

Original article _______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Annals of Oncology 12: 173^178, 2001.
(cid:223) 2001Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

Dietary glycemic load and colorectal cancer risk

S. Franceschi,1, 2 L. Dal Maso,1 L. Augustin,1, 3 E. Negri,4 M. Parpinel,1 P. Boyle,5
D. J. A. Jenkins3 & C. La Vecchia4, 6
1Servizio di Epidemiologia, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Aviano, Italy; 2Field and Intervention Studies Unit,
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France; 3Department of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto and
the Clinical Nutrition and Risk Factor Modi¢cation Center, St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 4Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche
‘Mario Negri’; 5Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, European Institute of Oncology; 6Istituto di Statistica Medica e Biometria, Universita'
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy

Summary

Background: Insulin and insulin-like growth factors can
stimulate proliferation of colorectal cells. High intake of re-
¢ned carbohydrates and markers of insulin resistance are
associated with colorectal cancer. To test the insulin/colon
cancer hypothesis, we determined whether the dietary glyce-
mic index and the glycemic load are associated with colorectal
cancer risk.

Design: A case-control study on colorectal cancer con-
ducted in Italy. Cases included 1125 men and 828 women with
histologically con¢rmed incident cancer of the colon or rectum.
Controls were 2073 men and 2081 women hospitalized for
acute conditions. We calculated average daily dietary glycemic
index and glycemic load, and ¢ber intake from a validated
food frequency questionnaire.

Results: Direct associations with colorectal cancer risk
emerged for glycemic index (odds ratio (OR) in highest vs.
lowest quintile = 1.7; 95% con¢dence interval (CI): 1.4^2.0)
and glycemic load (OR = 1.8; 95% CI: 1.5^2.2), after allowance
for sociodemographic factors, physical activity, number of daily
meals, and intakes of ¢ber, alcohol and energy. ORs were more
elevated for cancer of the colon than rectum. Overweight and
low intake of ¢ber from vegetables and fruit appeared to
amplify the adverse consequences of high glycemic load.

Conclusions: The positive associations of glycemic index
and load with colorectal cancer suggest a detrimental role of
re¢ned carbohydrates in the etiology of the disease.

Key words: colon cancer, ¢ber, glycemic load, rectal cancer

Introduction

Carbohydrate foods consumed in isoglucidic amounts
produce di¡erent glycemic and insulinemic responses
depending upon the nature of the food (e.g., ratio of
amylose to amylopectin, amount and type of ¢ber,
particle size of starch granules) and type and extent of
food processing (e.g., extrusion, £aking, grinding, and
cooking) [1].

A role of diets with a high glycemic response and
consequent hyperinsulinemia in colorectal carcinogene-
sis has been postulated [2, 3]. Several ¢ndings from an
Italian case-control study support this hypothesis. Direct
associations were found between colorectal cancer and
intake of re¢ned carbohydrates and energy [4], number
of daily meals [5], body mass index (BMI) in men and,
among women, central adiposity [6]. Conversely, inverse
associations emerged for intake of vegetables, pulses,
and ¢sh [7], ¢bre [8], unsaturated-to-saturated fat ratio
[4], and level of physical activity [9].

In order to test the insulin/colon cancer hypothesis,
we decided to evaluate the dietary carbohydrate compo-
nent using the glycemic index (GI), an indicator of

carbohydrate foods’ ability to raise blood glucose levels,
and the glycemic load score (GL), as a combination of
quality as well as quantity of carbohydrates consumed,
and thus a measure of dietary insulin demand.

Patients and methods

A case-control study of cancer of the colon and rectum was conducted
between January 1992 and June 1996 in six Italian areas: the provinces
of Pordenone and Gorizia in North-eastern Italy; the urban areas of
Milan and Genoa and the provinces of Forl|' , in the North; and Latina
and the urban area of Naples in the South [7].

Cases had histologically con¢rmed colorectal cancer diagnosed no
longer than one year prior to the interview (median 1 month) and with
no previous diagnoses of cancer at other sites. Overall, 1225 subjects
with cancer of the colon (688 men and 537 women, median age 62,
range 19^74 years) and 728 with cancer of the rectum and rectosigmoid
junction (437 men and 291 women, median age 62, range 23^74 years)
were included.

Controls were in-patients with no history of cancer,

in major
teaching and general hospitals in the same areas where cases lived,
and identi¢ed for acute, non-neoplastic, non-gynecological conditions,
unrelated to hormonal or digestive tract diseases. All chronic condi-
tions which may lead to lifestyle modi¢cations (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
cardiovascular diseases, etc.) were not eligible causes of hospital

174

Table 1. Glycemic index (GI) values for a few common foods and
recipes.a, b

Table 2. Distribution of 1225 cases of colon cancer, 728 of rectal
cancer and 4154 controlsa by sex, age group, years of education, and
level of physical activity. Italy, 1992^1996.

Foods

White breadc
Biscuits
Sugar
Pizza
Ice cream
Pasta/rice with tomato sauce
Apples and pears
Peas, beans, chick peas, lentils
Vegetable soup with noodles
Whole milk
Peaches, apricots and prunes
Tomatoes

GI

100
95
89
86
83
62
58
57
54
49
39
13

a Modi¢ed by references [17^19].
b Meat- and ¢sh-based recipes and cheese have a GI close to 0.
c Standard food.

admission. Conversely, comorbidity from the above conditions did not
represent an exclusion criterion. The control group included 2073 men
and 2081 women aged 19^74 years (median age 58) belonging to the
following diagnostic categories: trauma, mostly fractures and sprains
(27%); other orthopedic disorders, such as low back and disc disorders
(24%); acute surgical conditions (18%); eye diseases (24%); and other
miscellaneous diseases, such as ear, nose, throat, skin and dental
conditions (7%). About 4% of cases and controls approached during
their hospital stay refused to be interviewed.

The same structured questionnaire and coding manual were used
in each center, and all interviewers were centrally trained and routinely
supervised. The questionnaire included information on socio-demo-
graphic characteristics, such as education and occupation, lifetime
smoking and alcohol-drinking habits, physical activity, anthropomet-
ric measures at various ages, a problem-oriented personal medical
history and family history of cancer. Body mass index (BMI) was
computed as weight in kilograms divided by height in square meters.
In order to compute waist-to-hip (W : H) ratio, the interviewer measured
the circumference of waist (2 cm above the umbilicus) and hip (max-
imal protrusion). On account of medical or logistic problems, waist
and/or hip circumferences were not measured in 25% of colorectal
cancer cases and 19% of control subjects [6].

An interviewer-administered food-frequency questionnaire (FFQ)
including total energy.
was used to assess subjects’ habitual diet,
Average weekly frequency of consumption of foods or food groups, as
well as complex recipes during the two years prior to cancer diagnosis
or hospital admission (for controls) was elicited. The FFQ also
included 15 questions aimed at assessing individual fat intake pattern
and meal frequency. Satisfactory reproducibility [10, 11] and validity
[12] of the FFQ have been reported. To compute energy and nutrient
intake, an Italian food-composition data base was used [13]. Fiber,
de¢ned as non starch polysaccharides plus lignin, was divided accord-
ing to the type of food from which it originated (i.e., vegetables and
fruit or cereals) [14^16].

The GI is a qualitative assessment of foods based on the incremen-
tal glucose response and insulin demand they produce for a given
amount of carbohydrates. We expressed GI as a percent of the glycemic
response elicited by white bread as a standard food. For each case and
control subject, we calculated daily average GI by summing the
products of the carbohydrate content per serving for each food or
recipe, times the average number of servings of that food per week,
times its GI, all divided by the total amount of available carbohydrate
weekly intake [17, 18]. A score for the daily average GL was computed
as the GI, but without dividing by the total amount of carbohydrates.
For these calculations we used the carbohydrate content of 50 foods
or recipes since 28 foods or recipes, chie£y meat- and ¢sh-based ones
and cheese, contained a negligible amount of carbohydrates [13]. With

Characteristic

Cancer cases

Sex

Male
Female

Age group (years)

540
40^49
50^59
60^69
570

Education (years)

57
7^11
512
b
w2
2

Physical activity (at the
work place)

Low
Medium
High
b
w2
2

Colon,
n (%)

Rectum,
n (%)

688 (56)
537 (44)

437 (60)
291 (40)

55 (4)
114 (9)
321 (26)
518 (42)
217 (18)

621 (51)
331 (27)
267 (22)
48.66 c

26 (4)
67 (9)
197 (27)
306 (42)
132 (18)

422 (58)
181 (25)
122 (17)

0.41

444 (36)
451 (37)
330 (27)
42.59 c

231 (32)
258 (35)
239 (33)

1.40

Controls,
n (%)

2073 (50)
2081 (50)

347 (8)
732 (18)
1244 (30)
1356 (33)
475 (11)

2276 (55)
1156 (28)
693 (17)

1378 (33)
1476 (36)
1299 (31)

a Some ¢gures do not add up to the total because of some missing values.
b Compared to the control group, adjusted for age, sex, and center.
c P 5 0.05.

respect to GI values we chie£y used international tables [18]. In order
to take into account Italian cooking habits (e.g., pasta ‘al dente’),
Italian sources were used for a few local recipes [19]. Food items for
which a GI had not been determined were assigned the GI of the
nearest comparable food (e.g., tangerines were assigned the GI of
oranges). As an example, Table 1 shows GIs estimated for a few
common foods and recipes.

Odds ratios (ORs) and the corresponding 95% con¢dence interval
for quintiles of GI and GL were derived using unconditional multiple
logistic regression models [20]. The regression equations included
terms for age, sex, study center, years of education, occupational
physical activity, number of daily meals, and intakes of ¢ber, alcohol
and energy. Adjustment for energy was made using the residuals
method [21]. GI and GL were also introduced as continuous variables,
and the unit of measurement were 5 and 50, respectively.

Results

After allowance for age, sex, and center, patients with
cancer of the colon, but not rectum, were signi¢cantly
more educated and reported lower levels of physical
activity than controls (Table 2).

GI was positively correlated to GL (Pearson correla-
tion coe⁄cient, r = 0.59), intake of bread (r = 0.66),
cakes and sweets (r = 0.28), table sugar (r = 0.23), and
energy (r = 0.27), but negatively correlated to intake of
fruit (r = -0.19) and vegetables (r = ”0.12). Correlation
of GI with other dietary and non-dietary factors, in-
cluding intake of di¡erent types of fat, alcoholic bever-
ages, daily number of meals, BMI,
level of physical
activity, and smoking habits were weak (i.e., r 5 0.10).

175

Table 3. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% con¢dence intervals (CIs) a of colorectal cancer by quintile of energy-adjusted daily glycemic index and
glycemic load score, by subsite(s) and overall. Italy, 1992^1996.

Cancer site(s)

Number

OR (95% CI)
Quintile

w2
1 (trend)
P

Continuous

Glycemic index

Upper limit

Colon

Rectum

1225

728

Colon and rectum

1953

Glycemic load
Upper limit

Colon

Rectum

1225

728

Colon and rectum

1953

1b

2

3

4

70.7

73.8

76.5

79.6

5

^

1

1

1

1.4
(1.2^1.8)

1.0
(0.8^1.4)

1.3
(1.1^1.5)

1.7
(1.4^2.1)

1.4
(1.1^1.9)

1.6
(1.3^1.9)

1.6
(1.3^2.0)

1.3
(1.0^1.7)

1.5
(1.2^1.8)

1.9
(1.5^2.4)

1.4
(1.1^1.9)

1.7
(1.4^2.0)

29.5
P 5 0.001

9.6
P = 0.002

32.8
P 5 0.001

(5 units (cid:190) day)

1.18
(1.11^1.26)

1.12
(1.04^1.21)

1.16
(1.10^1.22)

151

190

229

285

^

(50 units (cid:190) day)

1

1

1

1.2
(1.0^1.6)

1.2
(0.9^1.5)

1.2
(1.0^1.5)

1.2
(1.0^1.5)

1.0
(0.7^1.3)

1.1
(0.9^1.4)

1.6
(1.3^2.0)

1.3
(1.0^1.7)

1.5
(1.2^1.8)

1.9
(1.5^2.4)

1.5
(1.1^1.9)

1.8
(1.5^2.2)

34.2
P 5 0.001

6.9
P = 0.01

35.3
P 5 0.001

1.26
(1.16^1.36)

1.09
(1.00^1.20)

1.20
(1.13^1.29)

a Adjusted for age, sex, study center, years of education, occupational physical activity, number of daily meals, intakes of ¢ber, alcohol and
energy.
b Reference category.

Colorectal cancer risk increased with an increase in
dietary GI (OR for highest versus lowest quintile: 1.7;
95% CI: 1.4^2.0) and GL (OR = 1.8; 95% CI: 1.5^2.2)
(Table 3). The ORs were somewhat higher for colon
cancer (1.9 for GI and 1.9 for GL in the highest quintile)
than rectal cancer (1.4 and 1.5, respectively).

Findings were similar in separate strata of age, but
the association for the combination of colorectal cancer
was somewhat stronger among women (OR in highest
quintile = 2.0 for GI and 2.6 for GL) than among men
(ORs 1.5 for either GI and GL). This di¡erence was
probably accounted for by a greater proportion of sub-
jects with colon cancer in the female than in the male
sex. No material interaction or e¡ect modi¢cation was
observed between GI or GL and level of physical activity,
alcohol drinking and unsaturated-to-saturated fatty acid
ratio. One hundred sixteen (6%) cases and one hundred
eighty-¢ve (4%) control subjects reported a history of
non-insulin dependent diabetes. OR in the highest in-
take quintile of GI and GL were, respectively, 2.1 and 2.4
among diabetic individuals and 1.7 and 1.8 among non-
diabetic individuals.

We examined the joint e¡ect of GL and di¡erent ¢ber
intake by cross-classifying patients with both variables
(Figure 1a and b). GL was directly associated with colo-
rectal cancer risk in each stratum of ¢ber from vegetables
and fruit (median intake 11.9 g per day). Similarly, low
¢ber intakes showed elevated ORs in each stratum of
dietary GL (Figure 1a). The OR for the combination of
the highest tertile of GL and the lowest tertile of ¢ber

from vegetables and fruit compared with the opposite
extreme was 1.9 (95% CI: 1.5^2.4). GL and ¢ber from
cereals (median intake 5.7 g per day) produced a di¡er-
ent picture (Figure 1b). The OR for the combination of
the highest tertile of GL and the lowest one of cereal
¢ber was 0.8 (95% CI: 0.5^1.5), whereas for the highest
tertile of GL and the highest of cereal ¢ber was 1.5 (95%
CI: 1.0^2.1). In fact GL and ¢ber from cereals were
strongly correlated (r = 0.81).

We also assessed the combined in£uence of GL and
the best indicators of visceral adipose tissue in our study,
i.e.,W : H ratio in women and BMI in men (Table 4). The
OR was 2.8 (95% CI: 1.9^4.1) in the highest GL tertile in
combination with the highest tertile of W : H ratio in
women. Among men, the OR for the combination of the
highest tertile of BMI and the highest GL tertile was 1.8
(95% CI: 1.3^2.7).

Discussion

High dietary GI and GL have been associated with
increased risk of non-insulin dependent diabetes [22,23]
and coronary heart disease [24], but the in£uence of GI
and GL on colorectal cancer risk has been little studied
[25]. Our present ¢ndings show that a diet that increases
glycemic response is involved in the etiology of cancers
of the colon-rectum, particularly of those which arise
from the colon. The associations with GI and GL were
independent from the presence of diabetes. Low intake

176

Figure 1. Odds ratio* of colorectal cancer by tertile of energy-adjusted glycemic load and ¢ber intake from di¡erent sources. Italy, 1992^1996.
*Adjusted for age, sex, study center, years of education, occupational physical activity, meal frequency, alcohol consumption, and energy intake.
(cid:192) Reference category.

of ¢ber from vegetables and fruit and elevated BMI or
W : H ratio appeared to contribute in enhancing colo-
rectal cancer risk when the diet was high in GL.

The positive associations we observed between GI
and GL and colorectal cancer were among the strongest
reported so far for any dietary factor [7, 25], and were
consistent in di¡erent strata of age, sex, and various risk
covariates. The strong risk increase among individuals
on a high-GL-low-¢ber diet is in agreement with the
property of ¢ber to £atten the glucose-response and has
also been observed in individuals with non-insulin de-
pendent diabetes [22, 23]. Fiber from vegetables and
fruit, which accounted for 2/3 of ¢ber intake, seemed to
exert a bene¢cial e¡ect on colorectal cancer risk and,
possibly, to mitigate the impact of high dietary GL. It is
possible that ¢ber from cereals did not appear to be
protective in our [8] as well as in other study populations
[26] because it was derived chie£y from highly re¢ned
cereal products [27]. Data on the relationship between
di¡erent types of ¢ber and glycemic response and insulin
demand depend on the nature of ¢ber and its relation to
the nutrients contained in the food [28]. When taken out
of their botanical structure, isolated cereal ¢ber is not
seen to reduce the rate of carbohydrate absorption while
viscous ¢ber (i.e., guar) has been shown to decrease the
rate of glucose absorption [29].

Whereas consumption of sugar and cakes is relatively
low, Italy shows the highest consumption of carbo-
hydrates from re¢ned cereals among a¥uent countries
[30], up to more than 300 g/day in one ¢fth of this study
population. Interestingly, the highest intake quintile of
white bread, whose GI is 100, was associated with an
energy-adjusted OR of 1.6 (95% CI: 1.3^1.9) whereas the
highest intake quintile of pasta, whose GI is only ap-
proximately 60, showed an OR of 1.2 (95% CI: 1.0^1.5).
Visceral adipose tissue has been associated with in-
creased insulin resistance and colorectal cancer risk [31].

Table 4. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% con¢dence intervals (CIs) a of
colorectal cancer by tertile of energy-adjusted daily glycemic load and
waist-to-hip ratio in females, and body mass index in males. Italy,
1992^1996.

OR (95% CI)
Glycemic load

5158

158^217 4217

Allb

1c

1.4
(0.9^2.0)

1.3
(0.9^1.8)
1c

1.5
(1.1^2.1)

2.1
(1.5^3.1)

1.6
(1.1^2.4)

1.4
(1.1^1.8)

1.9
(1.4^2.8)

1.9
(1.3^2.7)

2.8
(1.9^4.1)

1.7
(1.3^2.2)

1c

1.5
(1.2^2.0)

1.6
(1.2^2.1)

Females

Waist-to-hip ratio

50.8

0.8^0.86

40.86

Allb

Males

Body mass index

524.6

1c

24.6^27.44

427.44

Allb

0.9
(0.6^1.3)

1.1
(0.8^1.5)
1c

0.9
(0.7^1.3)

1.2
(0.8^1.6)

1.3
(0.9^1.8)

1.1
(0.9^1.4)

1.2
(0.9^1.7)

1.3
(0.9^1.8)

1.8
(1.3^2.7)

1.4
(1.1^1.8)

1c

1.1
(0.9^1.3)

1.3
(1.1^1.6)

a Adjusted for age, study center, years of education, occupational
physical activity, number of daily meals, intakes of ¢ber, alcohol and
energy, and recent weight loss.
b Adjusted also for glycemic load, waist-to-hip ratio or body mass
index as appropriate.
c Reference category.

Men have more visceral adipose tissue than women.
Thus, BMI was a good surrogate of visceral adipose tissue
in the male sex while W : H ratio had to be considered
among women [6]. Assessment of BMI and W : H ratio
in colorectal cancer patients is hampered by weight loss
in the proximity of cancer diagnosis. We had, however,
information on BMI changes over time, and we were
able to allow for recent weight loss [6].

In addition to dietary ¢ndings, several lines of evidence
suggest a role of insulin in colorectal carcinogenesis.
Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus is associated
with increased risk of colorectal cancer [32, 33]. Insulin
is considered to be a growth factor and has been shown
to increase insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I, which is
involved in long-term regulation of energy metabolism
[2]. Insulin and IGF receptors have been found in both
normal and malignant cells of colonic mucosa, and can
stimulate proliferation of human colorectal cells [2, 34].
Tall individuals [35] and those with acromegaly, who
have elevated levels of growth hormone and IGF-I [36],
have an increased incidence of colorectal cancer. Circu-
lating levels of IGF-I and II and IGF binding protein
(IGF BP)-III, which modulate access of IGF-I to IGF-
receptors, were related to subsequent colorectal cancer
risk [37, 38].

We used a validated questionnaire [10, 12] and had
access to a large number of colorectal cancer patients
and control subjects who, in the vast majority, agreed to
participate in the study. The control group included a
broad range of acute conditions unrelated to diet modi¢-
cations. Reported associations with GI and GL were not
restricted to any major nosological category of control,
and held true when cases and controls with a history of
diabetes were excluded. Allowance was possible for a
number of potential confounding factors,
including
number of daily meals, energy and alcohol intake, and
physical activity. Weaknesses of the present ¢ndings
include, however, the limitations of current GI estimates.
Many of them have been derived from small samples
and variations of estimates in mixed-meal situations are
unclear [17,18]. Notwithstanding, the present ¢ndings
lend indirect support to the hypothesis that increased
glycemic response and insulin resistance are associated
with colorectal cancer, most notably with that of the
colon.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the contributions of the
Italian Association for Research on Cancer, Milan, Italy.
The authors wish to thank Drs A. Giacosa, M. Mon-
tella, E. Conti, and Prof. D. Amadori for their help in
study coordination, and Mrs L. Mei for editorial assis-
tance.

177

References

1. Jenkins DJ, Kendall CW, Axelsen M et al.Viscous and nonviscous
¢bres, nonabsorbable and low glycaemic index carbohydrates,
blood lipids and coronary heart disease. Curr Opin Lipidol 2000;
11: 49^56.

2. McKeown-Eyssen G. Epidemiology of colorectal cancer revisited:
Are serum triglycerides and/or plasma glucose associated with
risk? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1994; 3: 687^95.

3. Giovannucci E. Insulin and colon cancer. Cancer Causes Control

1995; 6: 164^79.

4. Franceschi S, La Vecchia C, Russo A et al. Macronutrient intake
and risk of colorectal cancer in Italy. Int J Cancer 1998; 76: 321^4.
5. Favero A, Franceschi S, La Vecchia C et al. Meal frequency and

co¡ee intake in colon cancer. Nutr Cancer 1998; 30: 182^5.

6. Russo A, Franceschi S, La Vecchia C et al. Body size and colo-

rectal cancer risk. Int J Cancer 1998; 78: 161^5.

7. Franceschi S, Favero A, La Vecchia C et al. Food groups and risk

of colorectal cancer in Italy. Int J Cancer 1997; 72: 56^61.

8. Negri E, Franceschi S, Parpinel M, La Vecchia C. Fiber intake
and risk of colorectal cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1998; 7: 667^71.

9. Tavani A, Braga C, La Vecchia C et al. Physical activity and risk
of cancers of the colon and rectum: An Italian case-control study.
Br J Cancer 1999; 79: 1912^6.

10. Franceschi S, Negri E, Salvini S et al. Reproducibility of an
Italian food frequency questionnaire for cancer studies: Results
for speci¢c food items. Eur J Cancer 1993; 29A: 2298^305.

11. Franceschi S, Barbone F, Negri E et al. Reproducibility of an
Italian food frequency questionnaire for cancer studies. Results
for speci¢c nutrients. Ann Epidemiol 1995; 5: 69^75.

12. Decarli A, Franceschi S, Ferraroni M et al. Validation of a food-
frequency questionnaire to assess dietary intakes in cancer studies
in Italy. Results for speci¢c nutrients. Ann Epidemiol 1996; 6:
110^8.

13. Salvini S, Parpinel M, Gnagnarella P, Maisonneuve P, Turrini A.
Banca Dati di composizione degli alimenti per studi epidemiolo-
gici in Italia. Milano, Italy: Istituto Europeo di Oncologia 1998.

14. Holland B, Unwin ID, Buss DH. Cereals and cereal products. The
third supplement to McCance & Widdowson’s. The composition
of foods (4th edition). Nottingham, UK: The Royal Society of
Chemistry and Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food 1988.
15. Holland B, Unwin ID, Buss DH.Vegetables, herbs and spices. The
¢fth supplement to McCance & Widdowson’s. The composition
of foods (4th edition). Nottingham, UK: The Royal Society of
Chemistry and Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food 1991.
16. Holland B, Unwin ID, Buss DH. Fruit and nuts. The ¢rst supple-
ment to the ¢fth edition of McCance & Widdowson’s. The
composition of foods. Nottingham, UK: The Royal Society of
Chemistry and Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food 1992.
17. Wolever TM, Nguyen PM, Chiasson JL et al. Determinants of
diet glycemic index calculated retrospectively from diet records
of 342 individuals with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.
Am J Clin Nutr 1994; 59: 1265^9.

18. Foster-Powell K, Miller JB. International tables of glycemic

index. Am J Clin Nutr 1995; 62: 871S^93S.

19. Brighenti F, Casiraghi MC. In£uenza dei processi di trasforma-
zione sulla risposta glicemica ad alimenti amidacei. Giornale
Italiano di Nutrizione Clinica e Preventiva 1992; 1: 79^87.

20. Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research.
Vol. I. The analysis of case-control studies. IARC Scienti¢c
Publications no. 32. Lyon: International Agency for Research on
Cancer 1980.

21. Willett WC, Stampfer MJ. Total energy intake: Implications for

epidemiologic analysis. Am J Epidemiol 1986; 124: 17^27.

22. Salmero¤ n J, Ascherio A, Rimm EB et al. Dietary ¢ber, glycemic
load, and risk of NIDDM in men. Diabetes Care 1997; 20: 545^50.
23. Salmero¤ n J, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ et al. Dietary ¢ber, glyce-
mic load, and risk of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in
women. JAMA 1997; 277: 472^7.

178

24. Liu S, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE et al. A prospective study
of dietary glycemic load, carbohydrate intake and risk of coro-
nary heart disease in US women. Am J Clin Nutr 2000; 71: 1455^
61.

25. Slattery ML, Benson J, Berry DT et al. Dietary sugar and colon

cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomark Prev 1997; 6: 677^85.

26. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA et al. Dietary ¢ber and
the risk of colorectal cancer and adenoma in women. N Engl J
Med 1999; 340: 169^76.

27. Favero A, Salvini S, Russo A et al. Sources of macro- and micro-
nutrients in Italian women: Results from a food frequency
questionnaire for cancer studies. Eur J Cancer Prev 1997; 6: 277^
87.

28. Jenkins DJA, Axelsen M, Kendall CWC et al. Dietary ¢ber, lente
carbohydrates and the insulin resistant diseases. Br J Nutr 2000;
83 (Suppl 1): S157^63.

29. Leclere CJ, Champ M, Boillot J et al. Role of viscous guar gums
in lowering the glycemic response after a solid meal. Am J Clin
Nutr 1994; 59: 914^21.

30. World Cancer Research Fund in association with American
Institute for Cancer Research. Food, Nutrition and the Prevention
of Cancer: A Global Perspective. Washington, DC: American
Institute for Cancer Research 1997.

31. Schoen RE, Tangen CM, Kuller LH et al. Increased blood glucose
and insulin, body size, and incident colorectal cancer. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1999; 91: 1147^54.

32. La Vecchia C, Negri E, Decarli A, Franceschi S. Diabetes mellitus
and colorectal cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
1997; 6: 1007^10.

33. Hu FB, Manson JE, Simin L et al. Prospective study of adult

onset diabetes mellitus (type 2) and risk of colorectal cancer in US
women. J Natl Cancer Inst 1999; 91: 542^7.

34. Lahm H, Suardet L, Laurent PL et al. Growth regulation and co-
stimulation of human colorectal cancer cell lines by insulin-like
growth factor I, II and transforming growth factor alpha. Br J
Cancer 1992; 65: 341^6.

35. Hebert PR, Ajani U, Cook NR et al. Adult height and incidence
of cancer in male physicians (United States). Cancer Causes
Control 1997; 8: 591-7.

36. Ron E, Gridley G, Hrubec Z, Page W, Arora S, Fraumeni JF Jr.
[published erratum

Acromegaly and gastrointestinal cancer
appeared in Cancer 1992; 69: 549]. Cancer 1991; 68: 1673-7.

37. Ma J, Pollak MN, Giovannucci E et al. Prospective study of
colorectal cancer risk in men and plasma levels of insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-I and IGF-binding protein-3. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1999; 91: 620^5.

38. Manousos O, Souglakos J, Bosetti C et al. IGF-I and IGF-II in

relation to colorectal cancer. Int J Cancer 1999; 83: 15^7.

Received 10 August 2000; accepted 29 September 2000.

Correspondence to:
Dr L. Dal Maso
Servizio di Epidemiologia
Centro di Riferimento Oncologico
Istituto Nazionale Tumori
Via Pedemontana Occ.
33081 Aviano (PN)
Italy
E-mail: epidemiology@ets.it

  ARTICLE  

     Total and Cancer Mortality After Supplementation 
With Vitamins and Minerals: Follow-up of the Linxian 
General Population Nutrition Intervention Trial  
    You-Lin     Qiao   ,      Sanford M.     Dawsey   ,      Farin     Kamangar   ,      Jin-Hu     Fan   ,      Christian C.     Abnet   ,      Xiu-Di     Sun   ,      Laura     Lee 
Johnson   ,      Mitchell H.     Gail   ,      Zhi-Wei     Dong   ,      Binbing     Yu   ,      Steven D.     Mark   ,      Philip R.     Taylor                  

  

  

  

  

  

 Background  

 Methods  

 Results  

 The  General  Population  Nutrition  Intervention  Trial  was  a  randomized  primary  esophageal  and  gastric 
cancer prevention trial conducted from 1985 to 1991, in which 29 584 adult participants in Linxian, China, 
were  given  daily  vitamin  and  mineral  supplements.  Treatment  with  “factor  D,”  a  combination  of 
50   µ g  selenium,  30  mg  vitamin  E,  and  15  mg  beta-carotene,  led  to  decreased  mortality  from  all  causes, 
cancer overall   , and gastric cancer. Here, we present 10-year follow-up after the end of active intervention.  

 Participants were assessed by periodic data collection, monthly visits by village health workers, and quar-
terly review of the Linxian Cancer Registry. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the 
cumulative effects of four vitamin and mineral supplementation regimens were calculated using adjusted 
proportional hazards models.  

 Through  May  31,  2001,  276  participants  were  lost  to  follow-up;  9727  died,  including  3242  from  cancer 
(1515 from esophageal cancer and 1199 from gastric cancer). Participants who received factor D had lower 
overall mortality (HR   =   0.95, 95% CI   =   0.91 to 0.99;  P    =   .009; reduction in cumulative mortality from 33.62% 
to 32.19%) and gastric cancer mortality (HR   =   0.89, 95% CI   =   0.79 to 1.00;  P    =   .043; reduction in cumulative 
gastric cancer mortality from 4.28% to 3.84%) than subjects who did not receive factor D. Reductions were 
mostly  attributable  to  benefits  to  subjects  younger  than  55  years.  Esophageal  cancer  deaths  between 
those  who  did  and  did  not  receive  factor  D  were  not  different  overall;  however,  decreased  17%  among 
participants younger than 55  (HR   =   0.83, 95% CI   =   0.71 to 0.98;  P    =   .025) but increased 14% among those 
aged 55 years or older (HR   =   1.14, 95% CI   =   1.00 to 1.30;  P    =   .47). Vitamin A and zinc supplementation was 
associated with increased total and stroke mortality; vitamin C and molybdenum supplementation, with 
decreased stroke mortality.  

 Conclusion  

 The  beneficial  effects  of  selenium,  vitamin  E,  and  beta-carotene  on  mortality  were  still  evident  up  to 
10  years  after  the  cessation  of  supplementation  and  were  consistently  greater  in  younger  participants. 
Late effects of other supplementation regimens were also observed.  

  

J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101: 507  –  518   

                    With incidence rates exceeding 100 per 10 000 person-years, the 
people of Linxian, China, have some of the highest rates of esopha-
geal squamous cell carcinoma and gastric cardia adenocarcinoma 
in the world ( 1 , 2 ). Several studies in the early 1980s showed that 
nutritional  deficiencies  were  common  in  this  area,  suggesting  a 
link between these deficiencies and the high cancer rates ( 3 ). The 
Linxian General Population Nutrition Intervention Trial (NIT), a 
large-scale,  randomized,  double-blind,  primary  prevention  trial, 
was designed to test the efficacy of four combinations of vitamins 
and  minerals  in  reducing  esophageal  and  gastric  cardia  cancer 
incidence and mortality in Linxian ( 4  –  6 ). The results of this trial, 
which  started  March  1,  1986,  and  concluded  May  31,  1991, 
showed that supplementation with the antioxidant combination of 
selenium,  vitamin  E,  and  beta-carotene  statistically  significantly 
reduced total mortality, total cancer mortality, and gastric cancer 
mortality ( 5 ). The identification of statistically significant effects 

raises  questions  about  the  durability  of  these  effects  and  also 
potential good or bad late effects related to supplementation. 

  Affiliations  of  authors:   Cancer  Institute,  Chinese  Academy  of  Medical 
Sciences,  Beijing,  Peoples  Republic  of  China  (Y-LQ,  J-HF,  X-DS,  Z-WD); 
Division  of  Cancer  Epidemiology  and  Genetics,  National  Cancer  Institute 
(SMD, FK, CCA, MHG, SDM, PRT), and National Center for Complementary 
and Alternative Medicine (LLJ), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; 
Information    Management Services, Inc, Silver Spring, MD (BY) .   
  Correspondence to:  Philip R. Taylor, MD, ScD, Genetic Epidemiology Branch, 
Division  of  Cancer  Epidemiology  and  Genetics,  National  Cancer  Institute, 
National  Institutes  of  Health,  6120  Executive  Blvd,  Rm  7006,  MSC  7236, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-7236 (e-mail:  ptaylor@mail.nih.gov ).  
   See  “Funding” and “Notes” following “References.”  
   DOI:  10.1093/jnci/djp037  
  © The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.  

jnci.oxfordjournals.org   

JNCI

| Articles 507

  CONTEXT  AND  CAVEATS 

  Prior knowledge 
 The undernourished population of Linxian, China, has high rates of 
cancer  of  the  esophagus  and  gastric  cardia.  In  the  General 
Population Nutrition Intervention Trial of 1985 – 1991, 29 584 Linxian 
villagers aged 40 – 69 years were given daily supplements of one or 
more of four vitamin and mineral combinations. “Factor D,” which 
contained selenium, vitamin E, and beta-carotene, was associated 
with  reduced  mortality  overall,  from  cancer,  and  from  gastric 
cancer.  

  Study design 
 For 15-year follow-up, villagers were interviewed monthly concern-
ing their health and registered cancer deaths were reviewed to look 
for  sustained  and  delayed  effects  of  the  vitamin  supplements. 
Hazard  ratios  for  death  by  cancer,  stroke  and  other  causes  were 
calculated for the four supplement combinations.  

  Contribution 
 Ten years after the end of the trial, participants who took factor D 
still  had  a  5%  reduction  in  total  mortality  and  11%  reduction  in 
gastric cancer; these effects were concentrated among participants 
younger than 55 years. Esophageal cancer decreased 17% in par-
ticipants younger than 55 years, but increased 14% in those older 
than 55 years.  

  Implications 
 Sustained  benefits  were  associated  with  a  combination  of  sele-
nium, vitamin E, and beta-carotene supplementation. More subtle 
long-term  effects  were  also  observed 
for  other  vitamin 
supplements.  

  Limitations 
 It  is  not  known  which  items  in  the  supplement  combination  are 
responsible  for  the  combined  effect.  Because  the  study  was  pre-
formed  in  a  nutritionally  deprived  population  with  high  rates  of 
esophageal and gastric cancer, the findings might not be applica-
ble  to  other  populations.  It  is  possible  that  the  findings  could  be 
biased  by  a  general  improvement  in  nutrition  among  the  partici-
pants over the postintervention period. 

   

 From the Editors   

 Since the conclusion of active trial treatment in 1991, follow-up 
has  continued  on  all  participants  to  collect  data  on  cancer  inci-
dence and all-cause mortality. Here we report mortality results for 
the total 15.25 years of the trial and posttrial follow-up (through 
May 31, 2001) for the original a priori trial endpoints, that is, the 
effects of the intervention agents on esophageal and gastric cardia 
cancer mortality, and for all-cause mortality. 

  Subjects and Methods 
  Design of the Trial and Posttrial Follow-up 
 The design and conduct of the Linxian General Population NIT 
and its extended follow-up have been described elsewhere ( 4  –  6 ). In 
brief, participants were recruited in 1985 from four northern com-
munes  in  Linxian,  a  rural  county  in  Henan  Province.  Residents 
40 – 69 years of age with no history of cancer or debilitating disease 
were eligible for this trial and were asked to enroll. In all, 29 584 

subjects, 60% of those invited, were randomly assigned in the trial. 
These individuals were interviewed for medical history, family his-
tory of cancer, diet, and alcohol and tobacco consumption; were 
given a brief medical exam; and were asked to donate 10-mL blood 
sample. 

 The  nine  nutrients  studied  in  this  trial  and  their  daily  doses 
were retinol (5000 IU, as retinol palmitate), zinc (22.5 mg, as zinc 
oxide), riboﬂ avin (3.2 mg), niacin (40 mg), ascorbic acid (120 mg), 
molybdenum  (30   µ g,  as  molybdenum  yeast  complex),  selenium 
(50   µ g,  as  selenium  yeast),  alpha-tocopherol  (30  mg),  and  beta-
carotene  (15  mg).  Doses  ranged  from  one  to  two  times  US  Rec-
ommended Daily Allowances. An independent study of each of these 
nutrients  and  vitamins,  although  desirable,  was  not  practical. 
Therefore, these nine nutrients were combined into four regimens 
or factors: retinol and zinc (factor A); riboﬂ avin and niacin (factor B); 
vitamin C and molybdenum (factor C); and selenium, vitamin E, 
and beta-carotene (factor D). 

 The trial had a one-half 2 4  fractional factorial design, so partici-
pants  were  randomly  assigned  by  a  computer-generated  random 
numbers list to take one of eight combinations of the four factors. 
These eight intervention groups (treatment arms) were deﬁ ned by 
the following combinations of factors: ABCD, AB, AC, AD, BC, 
BD, CD, or placebo. With this design, half the subjects received 
and half did not receive each of the four factors (eg, half received 
and half did not receive factor A). 

 Supplements were distributed in coded pill bottles from March 
1, 1986, to May 1, 1991. Throughout the trial, the pill codes were 
kept in a secured ﬁ le at the study data management center in the 
United States and were available only to the study data manager. 
During the trial period, village health workers visited participants 
monthly to deliver pills, assess pill compliance, and ascertain vital 
and  disease  status.  Diagnostic  materials  (case  records,  pathology 
slides, and X-rays) for 85% of the cancer cases in the trial period 
were  available  and  were  reviewed  by  a  panel  of  American  and 
Chinese experts. In the subsequent 10 years posttrial, village health 
workers  or  study  interviewers  continued  to  contact  participants 
monthly. For new cancer diagnoses and deaths, diagnostic materi-
als were collected and cancer diagnoses were veriﬁ ed by the panel 
of American and Chinese experts (1991 to 1996) or senior Chinese 
diagnosticians from Beijing (1996 – 2001). Throughout the trial and 
the  posttrial  follow-up,  case  ascertainment  was  considered  com-
plete and loss to follow-up minimal (n   =   276, or <1%). Outcomes 
for  this  study  were  based  on  data  from  the  full  15.25  years  of 
follow-up, from March 1, 1986 (the start of intervention), through 
May  31,  2001  (10  years  after  the  intervention  ended).  Due  to 
delayed ascertainment of outcomes, the number of deaths reported 
here for the intervention period is higher than that in our original 
report. 

 Compliance,  measured  by  pill  disappearance  rates  and  bio-
chemical  measurements,  was  excellent.  The  overall  pill  disap-
pearance  rate  was  93%,  with  no  differences  by  treatment  arm 
(range    =    92% to 93%). Blood was analyzed in quarterly surveys 
of  a  sample  of  participants  for  retinol,  beta-carotene,  ascorbic 
acid, and glutathione reductase activation coefﬁ cient as a measure 
of  riboﬂ avin  status,  and  during  the  trial  period  all  values  were 
consistently  statistically  signiﬁ cantly  different  between  treated 
and untreated individuals (all  P  values < .001) ( 4 , 5 ). 

508   Articles | JNCI 

Vol. 101, Issue 7  |  April 1, 2009

 The  conduct  of  the  Linxian  General  Population  NIT  was 
approved by the institutional review boards of the Cancer Institute 
of  Chinese  Academy  of  Medical  Sciences  and  the  US  National 
Cancer Institute, and written informed consent was obtained from 
all  participants  for  participation.  The  trial  was  registered  as 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00342654.  

  Statistical Methods 
 The main outcomes of this study were esophageal and gastric car-
dia  cancer  mortality  and  total  mortality.  Participants  were  cen-
sored  at  their  last  known  follow-up  date,  date  of  death,  or  the 
administrative closure of follow-up for the study (May 31, 2001), 
whichever came first. The 15.25-year follow-up period was ana-
lyzed  as  a  whole  and  in  three  5-year  periods:  the  trial  period 
(March 1, 1986, to May 31, 1991) when the intervention agents 
were given and two other periods (June 1, 1991, to May 31, 1996, 
and June 1, 1996, to May 31, 2001) when active follow-up contin-
ued  but  no  additional  intervention  was  performed.  Among  the 
cancers,  both  esophageal  squamous  cell  carcinoma  and  gastric 
cardia adenocarcinoma occur at epidemic rates in this population, 
share  some  etiologic  risk  factors,  and  before  widespread  use  of 
endoscopy and biopsy, were diagnosed as a single disease referred 
to  as  “esophageal  cancer”  or  “hard  of  swallowing  disease”  ( 7 ). 
Through  2001,  esophageal  adenocarcinoma  was  nonexistent  in 
Linxian.  We  present  data  for  the  effects  of  the  supplements  on 
mortality  of  esophageal  squamous  cell  carcinoma,  gastric  cardia 
adenocarcinoma, gastric noncardia adenocarcinoma, and the com-
bination of esophageal and gastric cardia cancer (the original hard 
of swallowing disease). 

 We tabulated baseline frequencies and percentages of partici-
pants  by  demographics.  We  compared  risk  between  those  who 
received each factor and those who did not. In the analysis of facto-
rial trials, this kind of analysis is known as “at the margins analysis” 

and has the most power to examine the effect of each factor ( 8 ). 
Cox  proportional  hazards  models  were  used  to  calculate  hazard 
ratios (HRs) and 95% conﬁ dence intervals (95% CIs) for each fac-
tor, adjusting for the other three treatment factors, sex, age (con-
tinuous),  and  commune  (four  communes).  These  analyses  were 
conducted on 29 559 of 29 584 initial study participants; 25 were 
lost  to  follow-up  before  the  intervention  began  ( Figure  1 ). 
Interactions between each of the factors and age group or sex were 
examined by including appropriate terms in the Cox models. This 
testing of interactions between each of the treatments (factors) and 
age and sex was planned a priori ( 9 , 10 ) The 55-year age cut point 
was  chosen  because  it  is  the  midpoint  in  the  40-  to  69-year  age 
distribution  of  the  trial  population.  Kaplan – Meier  estimates  of 
cumulative event rates were plotted to compare time to death for 
each factor, for all subjects, and by sex and age group ( 11 ). In addi-
tion  to  “pure”  risks  determined  from  Cox  models  and  Kaplan –
 Meier estimates, we also estimated selected “crude” risks without 
adjustment for covariates (ie, cumulative incidence), analogous to 
the  approach  of  Fine  and  Gray  ( 12 ).  The  pure  cumulative  risks 
slightly exceeded the crude cumulative risks, as expected (data not 
shown). Indeed, the estimated pure risks exceeded the crude risk 
by no more than 0.01 for total mortality, total cancer mortality, 
gastric cancer mortality, and esophageal cancer mortality. To esti-
mate  the  calendar  time – speciﬁ c  hazard  ratios  for  the  ﬁ gures,  we 
calculated smoothed (moving) hazard ratio estimates using a gen-
eralized  additive  model  with  a  local  regression  (loess)  smoother 
with span 0.4 and a test-based conﬁ dence band.     

 The assumption of a constant treatment hazard ratio across the 
three study periods was veriﬁ ed for each of the analyses by examin-
ing  treatment  by  time  period  interactions.  All   P   values  are  two-
sided  and   P   values  less  than  .05  were  considered  statistically 
signiﬁ cant. Analyses were conducted using SAS version 9.1.3 ser-
vice pack 4 (SAS Institute, Inc, Cary, NC); ﬁ gures were produced 

Assessed for eligibility

(n = 43,956)

30,283 randomly allocated

to one of eight arms

Not meeting inclusion criteria (n = 1,499)
Refused to participate (n = 7,992)
Other reasons (n = 4,182)

  Figure  1  .     CONSORT  ﬂ ow  diagram  of  the 
Linxian General Population Trial.     

724 late exclusions

(range: 76–94 per arm)

due to death or cancer diagnosis

before starting treatment

276 lost to follow-up

29,559 received treatment

(range: 3,688–3,708 per arm)

29,559 were included in this analysis

(range: 3,688–3,708 per arm)

jnci.oxfordjournals.org   

JNCI

| Articles 509

using S-Plus 6.2 for Windows and Sigma Plot 8.0 (Systat Software, 
Inc, San Jose, CA).   

  Results 
 Through May 31, 2001, there were 381 954 total person-years of 
follow-up over a median of 15.25 years of observation. The base-
line  demographic  characteristics,  smoking  and  alcohol  use,  and 
family history of esophageal cancer for all subjects are shown in 
 Table 1 . As expected, there were no statistically significant differ-
ences  between  any  of  these  baseline  characteristics  by  treatment 
group assignments. Smoking prevalence was comparable and alco-
hol  consumption  was  much  less  common  than  in  the  United 
States.  A  family  history  of  esophageal  cancer  was  substantially 
more common than in the West.     

 Total and cause-speciﬁ c numbers of deaths for the entire study 
period and for the three 5-year periods are shown in  Table 2 . A 
total  of  9727  deaths  were  reported  during  the  15.25  years  of 
follow-up. Deaths due to cancer and cerebrovascular diseases each 
accounted  for  approximately  one-third  of  the  total  deaths.  The 
most common speciﬁ c causes of death were cerebrovascular events 
(n    =    2984),  esophageal  cancer  (n    =    1515),  and  gastric  cancer 
(n   =   1199). Total numbers of deaths were 2528 in the trial period 
(follow-up  period  1),  3555  in  follow-up  period  2,  and  3644  in 
follow-up period 3.     

 Adjusted hazard ratios (95% conﬁ dence intervals) for the asso-
ciations  between  each  intervention  factor  and  total  and  cause-
speciﬁ c  deaths  for  the  entire  study  period  and  for  each  of  the 
5-year follow-up periods are also shown in  Table 2 . Subjects given 
factor A (retinol and zinc) had a marginally increased risk of total 
mortality for the total follow-up period (HR   =   1.04, 95% CI   =   1.00 
to 1.09;  P    =   .035) compared with subjects not given factor A. In the 

 Table 1  .    Baseline demographic characteristics, smoking and alco-
hol consumption, and family history of cancer  

  Characteristic

All participants 

Range for the eight 

(% of total)

treatment arms  

 <50
 50 – 59
  ≥ 60

 Female
 Male

  No. of participants
 Age group (y)
    
    
    
 Sex
    
    
 Smoking * ,  †  
 Nonsmoker
    
    
 Smoker
 Alcohol drinking  †  ,  ‡  
    
    
 Family history of 
 
    
    

 Nondrinker
 Drinker

  esophageal cancer  †  
 No
 Yes

29 559
 

12 365 (42%)
10 258 (35%)
6936 (23%)

 

16 378 (55%)
13 181 (45%)

 

20 613 (70%)
8842 (30%)

 

22 539 (77%)
6915 (23%)

 

20 800 (71%)
8651 (29%)

3688 – 3708 
 
42% 
34% – 35% 
23% – 24% 
 
55% – 56% 
44% – 45% 
 
70% – 71% 
29% – 30% 
 
76% – 77% 
23% – 24% 
 

70% – 72% 
28% – 30%  

  *    Ever smoking cigarettes for 6 or more months.  
   †     Data on smoking (n = 104), drinking (n = 105), and family history (n = 108) 

were not available for some subjects.  

   ‡     Ever drinking any alcoholic beverage in the last 12 months.   

factor  A  group,  the  hazard  ratio  point  estimate  for  total  deaths 
remained  consistently  higher  than  unity  in  all  three  follow-up 
periods,  with  period-speciﬁ c  estimates  of  1.03,  1.05,  and  1.05, 
respectively,  although  none  of  the  period-speciﬁ c  estimates  was 
statistically signiﬁ cant. This increased risk was mainly due to the 
effect of factor A on noncancer deaths: The hazard ratio for cere-
brovascular deaths was 1.08 (95% CI   =   1.00 to 1.16;  P    =   .045) and 
for other causes of death was 1.06 (95% CI   =   0.99 to 1.13;  P    =   .088). 
The  hazard  ratio  point  estimates  associated  with  these  causes  of 
death  remained  higher  than  unity  (although  not  statistically  sig-
niﬁ cant) for all three follow-up periods. Neither sex (interaction 
 P    =   .372) nor age group (interaction  P    =   .757) statistically signiﬁ -
cantly modiﬁ ed the effect of factor A on total mortality. Factor A 
was also associated with period-speciﬁ c protective effects for other 
cancer  deaths  in  period  2  (HR    =    0.76,  95%  CI    =    0.58  to  1.00;  
P     =    .050)  and  for  cardia  cancer  deaths  in  period  3  (HR    =    0.73, 
95%  CI    =    0.57  to  0.93;   P     =    .012),  although  neither  effect  was 
consistent in the other time periods. 

 Intervention  with  factor  B  (riboﬂ avin  and  niacin)  was  not 
associated  with  total  deaths  in  the  overall  (HR    =    0.98,  95% 
CI    =    0.94  to  1.02;   P     =    .318)  or  period-speciﬁ c  analyses  when 
compared with lack of factor B, and hazard ratio point estimates 
remained close to 1 in all three follow-up periods ( Table 2 ). This 
factor was not associated with cause-speciﬁ c deaths overall or in 
any follow-up period, except for a marginally statistically signiﬁ -
cant protective effect on total cancer deaths in follow-up period 
2  (HR    =    0.89,  95%  CI    =    0.80  to  1.00;   P     =    .043).  The  effect 
of  factor  B  on  total  deaths  was  not  statistically  signiﬁ cantly 
modiﬁ ed by sex (interaction  P    =   .177) or age group (interaction 
 P    =   .109). 

 Factor C (vitamin C and molybdenum) was not associated with 
total deaths in overall (HR   =   0.97, 95% CI   =   0.94 to 1.01;  P    =   .177) 
or period-speciﬁ c analyses when compared with lack of factor C 
( Table 2 ). However, this factor was inversely associated with over-
all risk of cerebrovascular deaths (HR   =   0.92, 95% CI   =   0.86 to 
0.99;  P    =   .023), an effect not seen during the trial period but which 
became  apparent  during  later  follow-up.  There  were  no  statisti-
cally  signiﬁ cant  associations  between  factor  C  and  total  cancer 
mortality, esophageal or gastric cancer mortality, or other causes 
of mortality in the overall or period-speciﬁ c analyses, although a 
marginally  statistically  insigniﬁ cant  increase  in  the  combined 
esophageal and cardia cancer mortality endpoint was noted in the 
overall analysis (HR   =   1.08, 95% CI   =   1.00 to 1.17;  P    =   .052). Sex 
did not modify the effect of factor C on total mortality (interaction 
 P    =   .290), but there was a statistically signiﬁ cant interaction with 
age (interaction  P    =   .003) such that younger (<55 years at random 
assignment)  participants  had  reduced  risk  (HR  =  0.89,  95% 
CI = 0.83 to 0.96;  P    =   .001) and older ( ≥ 55 years at random assign-
ment) participants were unaffected (HR   =   1.01, 95% CI   =   0.97 to 
1.06;  P    =   .607). Statistically signiﬁ cant age group interactions were 
also seen for factor C with total cancer mortality and esophageal 
cancer  mortality;  younger  patients  were  unaffected  but  older 
participants had elevated hazard ratios ( Table 3 ).     

 Factor D (selenium, vitamin E, and beta-carotene) reduced total 
mortality (HR   =   0.95, 95% CI   =   0.91 to 0.99;  P    =   .009; reduction in 
cumulative  mortality  from  33.62%  in  the  no – factor  D  group  to 
32.19% in the factor D group). Moving hazard ratio curves ( Figure 2 ) 

510   Articles | JNCI 

Vol. 101, Issue 7  |  April 1, 2009

 Table 2  .    Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals for death by cause and vitamin and mineral treatment factors *   

  Cause of death by study period

N

 Total deaths
 Cancer
 Esophageal
 Gastric
 Cardia
 Noncardia
 Esophageal    and cardia
 Other cancer
 Cerebrovascular
 Other

 Total deaths
 Cancer
 Esophageal
 Gastric
 Cardia
 Noncardia
 Esophageal and cardia
 Other cancer
 Cerebrovascular
 Other

  Total study period (1986 – 2001)
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 Trial period (1986 – 1991)
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 Follow-up period 2 (1991 – 1996)
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 Follow-up period 3 (1996 – 2001)
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

 Total deaths
 Cancer
 Esophageal
 Gastric
 Cardia
 Noncardia
 Esophageal and cardia
 Other cancer
 Cerebrovascular
 Other

 Total deaths
 Cancer
 Esophageal
 Gastric
 Cardia
 Noncardia
 Esophageal and cardia
 Other cancer
 Cerebrovascular
 Other

 
9727
3242
1515
1199
873
326
2388
528
2984
3501
 
2528
992
448
406
297
109
745
138
643
893
 
3555
1245
594
436
321
115
915
215
1037
1273
 
3644
1005
473
357
255
102
728
175
1304
1335

Vitamin and mineral treatment factor  †  ,  ‡   

 Factor A (vs no 
factor A), HR 

(95% CI)

Factor B (vs no 
factor B), HR 

(95% CI)

Factor C (vs no 
factor C), HR 

(95% CI)

Factor D (vs no 
factor D), HR 

(95% CI)  

 

 
 
 
0.95 (0.91 to 0.99)  ‡   
0.97 (0.94 to 1.01)
1.04 (1.00 to 1.09)  ‡   0.98 (0.94 to 1.02)
0.95 (0.89 to 1.02) 
1.04 (0.97 to 1.11)
0.96 (0.90 to 1.03)
1.00 (0.93 to 1.07)
1.01 (0.91 to 1.11) 
1.09 (0.98 to 1.20)
0.93 (0.84 to 1.02)
1.07 (0.97 to 1.19)
0.89 (0.79 to 1.00)  ‡   
1.05 (0.94 to 1.18)
0.99 (0.88 to 1.10)
0.97 (0.87 to 1.09)
0.89 (0.78 to 1.01) 
1.07 (0.94 to 1.23)
1.00 (0.87 to 1.14)
0.95 (0.84 to 1.09)
0.90 (0.72 to 1.12) 
0.99 (0.80 to 1.24)
1.02 (0.82 to 1.27)
0.95 (0.88 to 1.03)
0.96 (0.89 to 1.04) 
1.08 (1.00 to 1.17)
0.95 (0.88 to 1.03)
1.03 (0.95 to 1.11)
0.89 (0.75 to 1.05)
0.94 (0.79 to 1.11) 
0.87 (0.73 to 1.03)
1.02 (0.86 to 1.21)
0.92 (0.86 to 0.99)  ‡   0.98 (0.91 to 1.05) 
1.08 (1.00 to 1.16)  ‡   1.02 (0.95 to 1.10)
0.92 (0.86 to 0.98)  ‡   
0.96 (0.90 to 1.03)
0.96 (0.90 to 1.03)
1.06 (0.99 to 1.13)
 
 
 
 
0.91 (0.84 to 0.99)  ‡   
1.00 (0.93 to 1.08)
0.99 (0.91 to 1.07)
1.03 (0.95 to 1.11)
0.91 (0.81 to 1.04) 
1.04 (0.92 to 1.18)
1.03 (0.91 to 1.16)
0.99 (0.87 to 1.12)
1.00 (0.84 to 1.21) 
1.06 (0.88 to 1.28)
0.90 (0.75 to 1.08)
0.97 (0.81 to 1.17)
0.81 (0.66 to 0.98)  ‡   
1.06 (0.87 to 1.28)
1.08 (0.89 to 1.31)
1.05 (0.86 to 1.27)
1.10 (0.88 to 1.39)
0.83 (0.66 to 1.04) 
1.15 (0.92 to 1.45)
1.07 (0.85 to 1.34)
0.75 (0.51 to 1.10) 
0.94 (0.65 to 1.37)
1.09 (0.75 to 1.59)
0.81 (0.56 to 1.18)
0.93 (0.81 to 1.07) 
1.08 (0.93 to 1.25)
0.96 (0.84 to 1.11)
1.04 (0.90 to 1.20)
0.96 (0.69 to 1.35) 
0.91 (0.65 to 1.28)
1.37 (0.98 to 1.93)
0.86 (0.62 to 1.20)
0.90 (0.77 to 1.05) 
0.99 (0.85 to 1.16)
0.93 (0.80 to 1.09)
1.06 (0.91 to 1.24)
0.97 (0.85 to 1.10)
0.92 (0.81 to 1.05) 
1.05 (0.92 to 1.20)
0.98 (0.86 to 1.12)
 
 
 
 
0.99 (0.93 to 1.06) 
0.97 (0.91 to 1.03)
1.05 (0.98 to 1.12)
0.95 (0.89 to 1.02)
0.99 (0.89 to 1.11) 
0.89 (0.80 to 1.00)  ‡   1.04 (0.93 to 1.16)
1.02 (0.91 to 1.14)
1.05 (0.89 to 1.23) 
1.04 (0.89 to 1.22)
0.91 (0.77 to 1.07)
1.15 (0.98 to 1.35)
1.00 (0.83 to 1.21)
0.91 (0.75 to 1.10)
1.11 (0.92 to 1.34)
0.95 (0.79 to 1.14) 
0.96 (0.77 to 1.20) 
1.11 (0.89 to 1.38)
0.90 (0.72 to 1.12)
0.99 (0.80 to 1.24)
0.91 (0.63 to 1.31) 
1.13 (0.78 to 1.63)
0.94 (0.65 to 1.35)
1.02 (0.71 to 1.47)
1.02 (0.89 to 1.16) 
1.06 (0.94 to 1.21)
0.90 (0.79 to 1.03)
1.09 (0.96 to 1.24)
0.93 (0.71 to 1.22) 
0.90 (0.69 to 1.18)
0.81 (0.62 to 1.07)
0.76 (0.58 to 1.00)
1.07 (0.95 to 1.21)
1.11 (0.98 to 1.26)
0.89 (0.79 to 1.01)
1.10 (0.97 to 1.24) 
0.90 (0.81 to 1.01) 
0.92 (0.83 to 1.03)
0.94 (0.84 to 1.05)
1.05 (0.94 to 1.17)
 
 
 
 
0.94 (0.88 to 1.00)  ‡   
0.97 (0.91 to 1.04)
0.99 (0.92 to 1.05)
1.05 (0.99 to 1.12)
0.94 (0.83 to 1.06) 
1.04 (0.92 to 1.18)
0.99 (0.86 to 1.13)
0.98 (0.87 to 1.11)
1.08 (0.90 to 1.29)
0.97 (0.81 to 1.16)
1.17 (0.98 to 1.40)
0.95 (0.80 to 1.14) 
0.91 (0.74 to 1.13) 
0.98 (0.79 to 1.20)
0.86 (0.70 to 1.06)
0.99 (0.80 to 1.21)
0.86 (0.67 to 1.10) 
1.00 (0.78 to 1.28)
0.73 (0.57 to 0.93)  ‡   1.05 (0.82 to 1.34)
1.06 (0.72 to 1.57) 
0.91 (0.62 to 1.35)
0.84 (0.57 to 1.24)
1.30 (0.88 to 1.93)
0.92 (0.80 to 1.06) 
1.11 (0.96 to 1.28)
1.00 (0.86 to 1.15)
0.94 (0.81 to 1.09)
1.02 (0.75 to 1.37)
1.08 (0.80 to 1.45)
0.85 (0.63 to 1.15)
0.93 (0.69 to 1.25) 
0.94 (0.84 to 1.05) 
0.90 (0.81 to 1.01)
1.00 (0.90 to 1.12)
1.08 (0.97 to 1.20)
1.08 (0.97 to 1.20)
0.96 (0.86 to 1.07)
1.00 (0.89 to 1.11)
0.93 (0.84 to 1.04)  

  *    HR   =   hazard ratio; CI   =   confidence interval.  
   †     Factor A   =   vitamin A (5000 IU/d) + zinc (22.5 mg/d); factor B   =   riboflavin (3.2 mg/d) + niacin (40 mg/d); factor C   =   ascorbic acid (120 mg/d) + molybdenum 
(30  µ g/d); factor D   =   selenium (50  µ g/d) + vitamin E (30 mg/d) + beta-carotene (15 mg/d). HRs (95% CIs) adjusted for the other three treatments factors, 
age (continuous), sex, and commune (four communes).  

   ‡      P  < .05.   

show the smoothed hazard ratios remained less than 1.0 for most of 
the 15.25 years of observation, indicating a protective effect during 
most  of  this  period.  The  estimated  hazard  ratios  for  the  three 
follow-up periods were 0.91 (95% CI   =   0.84 to 0.99;  P    =   .023), 0.99 
(95% CI   =   0.93 to 1.06;  P    =   .723), and 0.94 (95% CI   =   0.88 to 1.00; 
 P     =    .046),  respectively  ( Table  2 ).  The  hazard  ratios  for  the  three 
major group causes of mortality for the full 15.25 years of follow-up 

were also less than 1.0 but were not uniformly statistically signiﬁ cant: 
0.95 (95% CI   =   0.89 to 1.02;  P    =   .148) for cancer, 0.98 (95% CI   =   
0.98  to  1.05;   P     =    .613)  for  cerebrovascular  events,  and  0.92  (95% 
CI   =   0.86 to 0.98;  P    =   .013) for other causes. The majority of the 
overall effect was attributed to a reduced risk of death from gastric 
cancer  and  causes  of  death  other  than  cancer  or  cerebrovascular 
diseases.     

jnci.oxfordjournals.org   

JNCI

| Articles 511

 Table 3  .    Hazard ratios for total and cause-specific mortality by age group and vitamin and mineral treatment factor for the total 15¼ 
year follow-up for endpoints and factors with statistically significant or close to statistically significant interactions *   

  Cause of death and treatment factor  †  

  Total mortality (n   =   9727)
    
 Factor C (vs no factor C)
    
 Factor D (vs no factor D)
 Total cancer mortality (n   =   3242)
    
    
 Esophageal cancer mortality (n   =   1515)
    
    

 Factor C (vs no factor C)
 Factor D (vs no factor D)

 Factor C (vs no factor C)
 Factor D (vs no factor D)

Age group  ‡  

 <55 years at random 

assignment, HR (95% CI)

 ≥ 55 years at random 

assignment, HR (95% CI)  

 

 

0.89 (0.83 to 0.96)
0.88 (0.82 to 0.95)
 
0.93 (0.83 to 1.03)
0.85 (0.76 to 0.95)
 
0.96 (0.81 to 1.12)
0.83 (0.71 to 0.98)

1.01 (0.97 to 1.06)
0.98 (0.93 to 1.03)
 
1.12 (1.02 to 1.22)
1.02 (0.94 to 1.12)
 
1.18 (1.04 to 1.35)
1.14 (1.00 to 1.30)

 P  for age 

group 

interaction 

 

.002 
.023 

 

.016 
.019 

 

.058 
.003  

  *    HR   =   hazard ratio; CI   =   confidence interval.  
   †     Factor C = ascorbic acid (120 mg/d) + molybdenum (30  µ g/d); factor D = selenium (50  µ g/d) + vitamin E (30 mg/d) + beta-carotene (15 mg/d).  
   ‡     HRs (95% CIs) adjusted for the other three treatments factors, age (continuous), sex, and commune (four communes).   

 The effect of factor D on total mortality was not modiﬁ ed by sex 
(interaction   P     =    .843),  but  was  modiﬁ ed  by  age  group  (interaction 
 P    =   .024). Total and age-speciﬁ c cumulative event and moving hazard 
ratio curves presented in  Figure 2  show cumulative mortality by factor 
D.  The  hazard  ratios  were  0.95  (95%  CI    =    0.91  to  0.99; 
 P    =   .009) for all study subjects, 0.88 (95% CI   =   0.82 to 0.95;  P  < .001) 

for  subjects  younger  than  55  years  old  at  study  entry,  and  0.98 
(95% CI = 0.94 to 1.03;  P    =   .367) for subjects 55 or older at study entry 
( Table 3 ). Therefore, virtually the entire effect of factor D on total 
mortality was due to effects in individuals younger than 55 years. 

 Similar cumulative event rate curves and moving hazard ratio 
curves  for  total  cancer  mortality  ( Figure  3 ),  total  gastric  cancer 

All subjects

<55 years of age

60

50

40

30

20

10

60

50

40

30

20

10

55 years of age

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1986 1988 1990

1992

1994 1996 1998 2000
Year

2002

0
1986 1988 1990

1992

1994 1996 1998 2000
Year

2002

0
1986 1988 1990

1992

1994 1996 1998 2000
Year

2002

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2

1.1

11

0.9

0.8

0.7

1986 1988 1990

1992

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2

1.1

11

0.9

0.8

2002

0.7

1986 1988 1990

1992

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2

1.1

11

0.9

0.8

2002

0.7

1986 1988 1990

1992

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
u
m
u
C

o
i
t
a
r
 
d
r
a
z
a
H

1994 1996 1998 2000
Year

 
 Figure 2  .    Effects of factor D (a combination of 50  µ g selenium, 30 mg 
vitamin  E,  and  1.5  mg  beta-carotene  daily)  on  total  mortality  for  all 
subjects,  subjects  younger  than  55  years  at  random  assignment,  and 
subjects 55 years and older at random assignment, as shown by cumu-
lative  event  rates  (cumulative  density  function,  as  percentages)  from 

  
Kaplan – Meier estimates and smoothed (moving) hazard ratio curves. In 
Kaplan-Meier – based  curves,   dashed  lines   represent  participants  who 
received factor D;  solid lines  represent participants who did not receive 
factor D. In smoothed hazard ratio curves,  dotted lines  represent 95% 
conﬁ dence intervals around the hazard ratios.    

1994 1996 1998 2000
Year

1994 1996 1998 2000
Year

2002

512   Articles | JNCI 

Vol. 101, Issue 7  |  April 1, 2009

55 years of age

<55 years of age

All subjects

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
1986

1988

1990 1992

1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

0
1986

1988

1990 1992

1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

0
1986

1988

1990 1992

1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
11

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

1986

1988

1990 1992

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
11

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

1986

1988

1990 1992

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
11

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

1986

1988

1990 1992

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
v

 

l

i
t
a
u
m
u
C

o
i
t
a
r
 
d
r
a
z
a
H

1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

 
  Figure 3  .    Effects of factor D on total cancer mortality for all subjects, sub-
jects younger than 55 years at random assignment, and subjects 55 years 
and older at random assignment, as shown by cumulative event rates (as 
percentages) from Kaplan – Meier estimates and smoothed (moving) haz-

 
ard ratio curves. In Kaplan-Meier – based curves,  dashed lines  represent 
participants who received factor D;  solid lines  represent participants who 
did  not  receive  factor  D.  In  smoothed  hazard  ratio  curves,   dotted  lines  
represent 95% conﬁ dence intervals around the hazard ratios.     

1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Year

mortality ( Figure 4 ), and esophageal cancer mortality ( Figure 5 ) all 
show that the effects of factor D were predominantly or exclusively 
in subjects younger than 55 years. The hazard ratios for total can-
cer mortality associated with factor D were 0.95 (95% CI   =   0.89 to 
1.02;   P     =    .148)  for  all  subjects,  0.85  (95%  CI    =    0.76  to  0.95; 
 P    =   .003) for those younger than 55, and 1.02 (95% CI   =     ⫺ 0.94 to 
1.12;   P     =    .976)  for  those  55  or  older  ( Table  3 ).  Corresponding 
hazard ratios for gastric cancer mortality were 0.89 (95% CI   =   0.79 
to 1.00;  P    =   .043), 0.83 (95% CI   =   0.69 to 1.00;  P    =   .046), and 0.93 
(95% CI   =   0.80 to 1.07;  P    =   .307). Cumulative crude gastric cancer 
mortality  for  all  subjects  was  4.28%  in  the  no – factor  D  group 
compared with 3.84% in the factor D group, an overall reduction 
of 0.44%. For esophageal cancer mortality, effect modiﬁ cation by 
age was even more pronounced. There was no overall association 
between factor D and esophageal cancer mortality for all subjects 
(HR   =   1.01, 95% CI   =   .91 to 1.11;  P    =   .905); however, in subjects 
younger  than  55  years,  factor  D  esophageal  cancer  mortality 
decreased (HR   =   0.83, 95% CI   =   0.71 to 0.98;  P    =   .025), whereas 
in individuals aged 55 years or older, it increased (HR   =   1.14, 95% 
CI   =   1.00 to 1.30;  P    =   .047) ( Table 3 ).              

  Discussion 
 The initial results of the Linxian General Population NIT, pub-
lished in 1993, showed no association between factors A, B, or C 
and  overall  mortality,  total  cancer  mortality,  or  mortality  from 

esophageal  or  gastric  cancers  ( 5 ).  However,  factor  D,  which 
included selenium, vitamin E, and beta-carotene, statistically sig-
nificantly reduced total mortality, total cancer mortality, and mor-
tality  from  gastric  cancer  ( 5 ).  An  important  question  remained, 
however,  whether  the  preventive  effects  of  factor  D  would  last 
beyond  the  trial  period.  The  results  of  the  continued  follow-up 
show  that  hazard  ratios,  as  indicated  by  moving  hazard  ratio 
curves, remained less than 1.0 for each of these endpoints for the 
majority of the follow-up period; 10 years after completion of the 
trial, the group that received factor D still showed a 5% reduction 
in total mortality and an 11% reduction in gastric cancer mortality. 
Overall, one in 70 people who took factor D was spared death from 
all causes, and one in 227 was spared death from gastric cancer. 

 Stratiﬁ cation  of  results  by  sex  and  age  was  planned  a  priori. 
There  were  no  statistically  signiﬁ cant  interactions  with  sex. 
However, when stratiﬁ ed by age, factor D had a strong protective 
effect in individuals younger than 55 years but almost no effect on 
subjects aged 55 years or older. This pattern was seen consistently 
for total mortality, total cancer mortality, gastric cancer mortality, 
and esophageal cancer mortality. Indeed, the effect of factor D on 
esophageal cancer was reversed by age, showing a protective effect 
for younger but a harmful effect for older individuals. 

 Because  this  trial  provided  selenium,  vitamin  E,  and  beta-
carotene as one factor, it was not possible to disentangle the effects 
of  these  three  supplements.  However,  observational  case – cohort 
studies  using  subjects  in  this  cohort  and  patients  with  upper 

jnci.oxfordjournals.org   

JNCI

| Articles 513

55 years of age

<55 years of age

All subjects

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Year

Year

Year

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.5

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.5

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.5

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
y
t
i

s
n
e
d
e
v

 

l

i
t
a
u
m
u
C

o
i
t
a
r
 
d
r
a
z
a
H

0.4

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0.4

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0.4

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Year

 
 Figure  4  .     Effects  of  factor  D  on  total  gastric  cancer  mortality  for 
all  subjects,  subjects  younger  than  55  years  at  random  assignment, 
and  subjects  55  years  and  older  at  random  assignment,  as  shown 
by cumulative event rates (cumulative density function, as percent-
ages) from Kaplan – Meier estimates and smoothed (moving) hazard 

Year

  
ratio curves. In Kaplan-Meier – based curves,  dashed lines  represent 
participants who received factor D;  solid lines  represent participants 
who did not receive factor D. In smoothed hazard ratio curves, dot-
ted  lines  represent  95%  conﬁ dence  intervals  around  the  hazard 
ratios.    

Year

gastrointestinal tract cancers that developed during the interven-
tion period showed inverse associations between risk of esophageal 
cancer and baseline serum levels of selenium and alpha-tocopherol, 
but  not  beta-carotene  ( 13  –  15 ).  Higher  baseline  serum  selenium 
also was associated with reduced risk of gastric cardia cancer ( 13 ). 
These results suggest that the protective effects seen in the ran-
domized trial were due to the selenium and vitamin E components. 
In a subcohort of 1103 subjects from this trial followed through 
May  31,  2001,  higher  baseline  serum  selenium  levels  also  were 
associated  with  statistically  signiﬁ cant  reductions  in  esophageal 
and  gastric  cardia  cancer  mortality  ( 16 ).  A  separate  randomized 
controlled trial in Linxian ( 17 ) gave further support for a preven-
tive  effect  of  selenium  in  subjects  with  preexisting  esophageal 
squamous dysplasia, the precursor lesion of esophageal squamous 
cell carcinoma. Compared with control subjects, those with mild 
dysplasia who received 10 months of daily supplementation with 
200  µ g of selenomethionine were more likely to have regression 
and less likely to have progression of their esophageal squamous 
dysplasia. 

 In addition to evaluating the durability of the beneﬁ cial effects 
observed  during  the  trial  period  for  factor  D,  we  also  evaluated 
other postintervention events in this trial to look for late effects, 
and  several  were  noted.  When  the  full  15.25  years  of  follow-up 
were  considered,  nutritional  supplementation  with  factor  A 
(vitamin A and zinc) was associated with increased total mortality, 
mainly due to an increase in stroke deaths among subjects given 

factor  A  compared  with  those  who  were  not  given  factor  A, 
whereas supplementation with factor C (vitamin C and molybde-
num) was associated with a decrease in stroke deaths and with a 
slight increase in esophageal/cardia cancer deaths. 

 Increased mortality among factor A recipients was not expected, 
given  the  low  retinol  levels  of  the  population  at  the  start  of  the 
trial, the modest doses of both vitamin A and zinc, and the gener-
ally null or protective results from previous observational studies 
in this cohort relating high serum retinol and tissue zinc concen-
trations  to  various  cancer  endpoints  ( 15 , 18 ).  In  fact,  a  previous 
analysis of stroke (the main contributor to the observed increase in 
total mortality) in this trial showed a protective effect for persons 
who took the combination of factor A and factor D (HR    =    0.71, 
95% CI    =    0.50 to 1.00, for group AD vs placebo) ( 19 ). 

 We were surprised that factor C, a combination of vitamin C 
and molybdenum, appeared to be associated with increased risk for 
the  combined  esophageal  and  cardia  cancer  endpoint,  given  the 
well-known  role  of  vitamin  C  as  an  antioxidant  and  inhibitor  of 
carcinogenic  N -nitroso compound production in the stomach ( 20 ). 
Furthermore,  many  epidemiological  studies  have  shown  reduced 
risk  of  these  cancers  in  persons  with  high  consumption  of  fruits 
and vegetables and rich sources of vitamin C, and the only pro-
spective  study  of  plasma  vitamin  C  and  gastric  cancer  showed  a 
protective effect for high concentrations ( 21 ). No similar prospec-
tive studies of plasma vitamin C values in esophageal cancer are 
known. 

514   Articles | JNCI 

Vol. 101, Issue 7  |  April 1, 2009

55 years of age

<55 years of age

All subjects

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0
1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Year

Year

Year

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.5

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.5

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

0.6

0.5

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
t
c
n
u
f
 
y
t
i

s
n
e
d
e
v

 

l

i
t
a
u
m
u
C

o
i
t
a
r
 
d
r
a
z
a
H

0.4

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0.4

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

0.4

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Year

 
  Figure  5  .     Effects  of  factor  D  on  esophageal  cancer  mortality  for  all 
subjects, subjects younger than 55 years old at random assignment, 
and subjects 55 years and older at random assignment, as shown by 
cumulative event rates (cumulative density function, as percentages) 
from  Kaplan – Meier  estimates  and  smoothed  (moving)  hazard  ratio 

Year

 
curves.  In  Kaplan-Meier – based  curves,   dashed  lines   represent  par-
ticipants  who  received  factor  D;   solid  lines   represent  participants 
who did not receive factor D. In smoothed hazard ratio curves,  dot-
ted  lines   represent  95%  conﬁ dence  intervals  around  the  hazard 
ratios.    

Year

 The  decreased  risk  of  stroke  among  trial  participants  who 
received factor C was not wholly unexpected. Higher plasma vita-
min C levels have been associated with reduced risk of stroke in 
prospective epidemiological studies ( 22  –  24 ), although randomized 
trials that have included vitamin C as part of an antioxidant vitamin 
treatment  arm  have  not  shown  any  effect  ( 25 , 26 ).  There  are  no 
data on molybdenum and stroke. 

 The effects of vitamin and mineral supplements on reduction of 
total  mortality  and  cancer  mortality  have  been  heavily  debated 
over the past 25 years. The results of this study need to be inter-
preted in the context of other trials of vitamin and mineral supple-
mentation. By the 1980s, it was established that antioxidants could 
quench free oxygen radicals and potentially reduce the risk of can-
cer by preventing DNA damage by these radicals. Observational 
epidemiological studies showed inverse associations between can-
cer incidence and dietary intake of several vitamins and minerals, 
but more deﬁ nitive evidence awaited the completion of random-
ized  trials  ( 27 ).  It  was  generally  assumed  that  prescribing  pills 
would be a more convenient and acceptable way to prevent cancer 
than proscribing carcinogens. These facts and assumptions moti-
vated the design and conduct of the ﬁ rst generation of randomized 
controlled cancer prevention trials, including the Linxian General 
Population NIT, to reduce cancer risk using vitamins and miner-
als. The results of the largest and most informative of these trials 
(ie, those with more than 10 000 participants) were often contrary 
to the initial expectations. Beta-carotene supplementation increased 

total  mortality  in  both  the  Alpha-Tocopherol,  Beta-Carotene 
(ATBC) Cancer Prevention Study ( 28 ) and the beta-CArotene and 
Retinol Efﬁ cacy Trial (CARET) Study ( 29 ), whereas no mortality 
beneﬁ t  for  beta-carotene  was  seen  in  either  The  Physicians ’  
Health Study (PHS) ( 30 ) or the Women ’ s Health Study ( 31 ). The 
most likely explanation for the unexpected ﬁ ndings from these four 
large trials conducted in the West is a mismatch of the design of 
the trials with the population attributes: each of these trials tested 
pharmacological doses of micronutrients in already well-nourished 
populations ( 32 ). 

 A recent meta-analysis of randomized trials of antioxidant sup-
plements  for  prevention  of  cancer  and  other  diseases  ( 33 )  com-
bined  the  results  of  these  large-scale  studies  with  many  smaller 
studies and concluded that treatment with beta-carotene, vitamin A, 
or vitamin E likely increased total mortality, and the effect of vita-
min C or selenium on total mortality needed further study. The 
results of this study agree in part with the meta-analysis conclu-
sions. In this trial, factor A (which included vitamin A) increased 
mortality, factor C (which included vitamin C) was not associated 
with  overall  mortality,  and  factor  D  (which  included  selenium) 
decreased mortality. However, beta-carotene and vitamin E, two 
supplements that were associated with increased mortality risk in 
the  meta-analysis,  were  in  factor  D,  which  reduced  mortality  in 
this trial. Several potential explanations exist for these apparently 
discrepant results. First, the protective effect of selenium may have 
been stronger than the possible deleterious effects of beta-carotene 

jnci.oxfordjournals.org   

JNCI

| Articles 515

and  vitamin  E  in  this  trial,  so  the  overall  effect  of  factor  D  was 
beneﬁ cial.  This  hypothesis  is  supported  by  medium-sized  trials 
that have shown beneﬁ cial effects for selenium in reducing mortal-
ity and cancer risk ( 34  –  36 ). 

 A  second  possible  explanation  for  these  discrepancies  is  that 
baseline  nutritional  status  of  the  populations  studied  inﬂ uenced 
the supplementation effects. The people of Linxian are nutrition-
ally deﬁ cient ( 3 , 37 ), so vitamin and mineral supplements may be 
more beneﬁ cial to them than to other populations that have been 
studied.  The  results  of  the  Dysplasia  NIT  ( 38 ),  a  medium-sized 
randomized nutrition intervention trial that was conducted among 
subjects with cytologically diagnosed esophageal squamous dyspla-
sia in Linxian at the same time as the General Population NIT, 
showed that supplementation with 26 minerals and vitamins was 
associated with a non – statistically signiﬁ cant 7% reduction in mor-
tality risk. Results from the Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial 
showed  that  the  beneﬁ ts  for  selenium  supplementation  on  total 
cancer mortality ( 39 ) and the development of prostate cancer ( 36 ) 
were essentially limited to participants with lower selenium levels 
at the start of the trial. Further support for this hypothesis comes 
from the data of the meta-analysis of antioxidant supplement trials 
and total mortality itself ( 33 ). We classiﬁ ed the 68 study popula-
tions included in this analysis as Western (n    =    58), East Asian (n    =    8), 
or other (n    =    2) and found statistically signiﬁ cant heterogeneity 
between the results of the studies performed in Western and East 
Asian populations. The Western studies had a combined odds ratio 
(OR) of 1.04 (95% CI    =   1.01 to 1.06) and the East Asian studies 
had a combined OR of 0.92 (95% CI    =    0.84 to 1.02) ( ␹  2  for het-
erogeneity   P      =   .02).  Because  nearly  all  of  the  events  in  the  East 
Asian group came from Linxian, which we know has borderline or 
deﬁ cient nutrition, this difference in meta-analysis results may well 
reﬂ ect differences in the baseline nutritional status of the popula-
tions evaluated. 

 A  third  possible  explanation  for  the  heterogeneity  of  results 
observed among studies that have evaluated the association of vita-
min supplements and total mortality or gastrointestinal cancer risk 
is effect modiﬁ cation by the stage of disease at study entry. Our 
results show that only individuals younger than 55 years beneﬁ ted 
from factor D. This result may indicate greater beneﬁ t earlier in 
the course of carcinogenesis and is consistent with a “point of no 
return,” beyond which supplementation with vitamins is not useful 
and  may  be  harmful,  preferentially  beneﬁ ting  the  developing 
tumor more than the host. This hypothesis may help explain why 
observational  studies,  which  reﬂ ect  long-term  intake  of  vitamins 
and vitamin-containing fruits and vegetables, have usually shown 
beneﬁ cial  associations,  whereas  trials,  which  have  largely  been 
conducted in older patients, have sometimes shown harmful effects 
from vitamin interventions. 

 Participants in the ATBC and CARET studies, in addition to 
being older than those in the Linxian general population trial (ages 
50 – 69 years for ATBC and 45 – 74 years for CARET), were heavy 
smokers and some were exposed to asbestos, both powerful carci-
nogenic exposures that may have put them beyond the point in the 
disease process that they could beneﬁ t from supplements. Detailed 
analyses of both of these studies have shown that the increased risk 
associated with vitamin use was almost exclusively seen in current 
(as  opposed  to  former)  smokers  ( 40 )  and  in  those  who  smoked 

most ( 41 ). In contrast, the PHS study, which included fewer than 
10% smokers, showed no adverse effect of beta-carotene ( 30 ). 

 In addition to this report, three other cancer prevention nutri-
tion  intervention  trials  have  reported  results  from  continued 
follow-up after the termination of intervention. Follow-up of the 
participants of the ATBC Study for up to 8 years after the end of 
the  intervention  showed  that  both  the  harmful  effects  of  beta-
carotene (ie, increased total mortality and lung cancer incidence) 
and the beneﬁ cial effect of vitamin E (ie, decreased prostate cancer 
incidence)  disappeared,  albeit  slowly  ( 42 ).  However,  analyses  of 
cerebral infarcts (80% of all strokes) among vitamin E recipients in 
the ATBC Study showed reversed effects during the trial (relative 
risk [RR]   =   0.86, 95% CI   =   0.75 to 0.99) ( 43 ) and the 6 years post-
trial  (RR    =    1.13,  95%  CI    =    1.00  to  1.27)  ( 44 ).  After  6  years  of 
postintervention follow-up in the CARET study, the relative risk 
of total mortality remained greater than 1.0, but this elevated risk 
diminished  and  was  no  longer  statistically  signiﬁ cant  ( 45 ).  Lung 
cancer  mortality,  however,  was  still  statistically  signiﬁ cantly 
increased. The Calcium Polyp Prevention Trial reported that the 
protective  effect  of  calcium  supplementation  on  colorectal  ade-
noma recurrence found during the trial period (RR   =   0.81, 95% 
CI   =   0.74 to 0.98) ( 46 ) continued up to 5 years after supplementa-
tion  ended  and  was,  if  anything,  stronger  after  than  during  the 
intervention itself (RR   =   0.63, 95% CI   =   0.46 to 0.87) ( 47 ). 

 Durability of cancer prevention effects after cessation of inter-
vention has also been observed with nonnutritional agents. In fact, 
the most consistent example of a sustained cancer prevention effect 
reported to date from any cancer prevention agent tested in trials 
is  for  tamoxifen  in  the  primary  prevention  of  breast  cancer. 
Posttrial  follow-up  from  three  tamoxifen  trials  ( 48  –  50 )  consis-
tently found beneﬁ t after the conclusion of active treatment, and 
in one trial ( 50 ), statistically signiﬁ cant reduction in risk (among 
patients  with  estrogen  receptor-positive  tumors)  was  seen  only 
after treatment had ceased. 

 This study has several strengths. It was a randomized double-
blind design and had excellent compliance and long-term follow-up 
with  virtually  complete  ascertainment  of  cases  in  a  well-deﬁ ned 
population. 

 This study also has limitations. Interventions with factors con-
taining  multiple  agents  do  not  allow  evaluation  of  the  effects  of 
individual agents alone, nor were we able to evaluate more than 
one  dose  for  each  of  the  agents  supplemented.  The  people  of 
Linxian are deﬁ cient in many micronutrients, which may limit the 
generalizability of these results to well-nourished populations. If 
the protective effects of this study are due to replacement of essen-
tial nutrients in a nutritionally deprived population, then similar 
interventions might be useful in similarly deprived populations in 
the West, including the United States, although populations with 
low rates of esophageal and gastric cancer mortality are unlikely to 
avert  as  many  deaths  as  high-rate  populations  such  as  that  in 
Linxian.  Finally,  the  smoothed  hazard  ratios  that  we  presented 
were intended to provide an alternative visual representation of the 
effects at speciﬁ c points in time and to complement the cumulative 
view offered by the Kaplan – Meier curves. These smoothed hazard 
ratios  should  be  interpreted  with  caution,  however,  because  the 
conﬁ dence intervals around these curves nearly always include 1.0. 
Thus, such curves are affected by the play of chance and may be 

516   Articles | JNCI 

Vol. 101, Issue 7  |  April 1, 2009

biased by choice of smoothing parameters, edge effects, and other 
factors. 

 It should be noted that the follow-up period occurred during a 
time of dramatic economic progress in China as a whole. Although 
documented  improvements  in  dietary  intakes  in  Linxian  during 
follow-up  were  modest  ( 37 ),  more  substantial  undocumented 
changes  almost  certainly  occurred.  Effects  of  dietary  improve-
ments should have been evenly distributed across all participants in 
the various randomized treatment groups in the trial. Thus, if the 
effects of the supplements and the dietary micronutrient intake are 
additive, any dietary changes that might have occurred should not 
bias the treatment group effects in the postintervention period. If 
instead  the  beneﬁ t  from  supplementation  was  to  correct  a  deﬁ -
ciency state to exceed some minimum required threshold, then, if 
all  people  started  to  become  less  deﬁ cient  because  of  dietary 
improvements over time, the observed treatment effects would be 
expected to weaken. It is all the more remarkable then that beneﬁ ts 
persisted  despite  this  likely  improved  nutrition  and  its  attendant 
attenuation of treatment effects. It is also possible that improved 
diet  may  have  modiﬁ ed  effects  in  the  postintervention  period, 
including the enhanced beneﬁ t widely observed in younger partici-
pants and the emergence of late effects, most notably the beneﬁ t 
for factor C on cerebrovascular deaths. 

 In summary, 10 years of postintervention follow-up of partici-
pants in this cancer prevention trial demonstrated the durability of 
previously  observed  beneﬁ cial  effects  on  mortality  from  supple-
mentation with selenium, vitamin E, and beta-carotene. The per-
sistence of risk reduction for up to 10 years after treatment in this 
trial reinforces the validity of the original trial ﬁ ndings and is con-
sistent  with  an  emerging  new  paradigm  in  cancer  prevention, 
namely,  that  prevention  may  be  achievable  with  short-term  as 
opposed  to  life-long  treatment.  Striking  age  interactions  were 
seen,  suggesting  that  supplements  may  be  more  beneﬁ cial  in 
younger age groups. Late beneﬁ cial and harmful effects on mortal-
ity not observed during the trial period of supplementation were 
also  seen  for  other  supplementation  groups.  Durability  and  late 
effects should be examined in other prevention trials.     

  References 
  

 1.       Li     JY   ,    Liu     BQ   ,    Li     GY   ,    Chen     ZJ   ,    Sun     XI   ,    Rong     SD    .   Atlas of cancer mortal-
ity  in  the  People’s  Republic  of  China.  An  aid  for  cancer  control  and 
research  .   Int J Epidemiol .      1981  ;  10  (  2  ):  127   –   133       . 

  

  

  

  

  

  

 2.       Li      JY    .    Epidemiology  of  esophageal  cancer  in  China  .    J  Natl  Cancer  Inst 

Monogr .      1982  ;  62  :  113   –   120    . 

 3.       Yang      CS   ,     Sun      Y   ,     Yang      QU  ,  et  al    .    Vitamin  A  and  other  deﬁ ciencies  in 
Linxian, a high esophageal cancer incidence area in northern China  .   J Natl 
Cancer Inst .      1984  ;  73  (  6  ):  1449   –   1153    . 

 4.       Li     B   ,    Taylor     PR   ,    Li     JY  , et al    .   Linxian nutrition intervention trials. Design, 
methods, participant characteristics, and compliance  .   Ann Epidemiol .      1993  ;
  3  (  6  ):  577   –   585    . 

 5.       Blot     WJ   ,    Li     JY   ,    Taylor     PR  , et al    .   Nutrition intervention trials in Linxian, 
China: supplementation with speciﬁ c vitamin/mineral combinations, can-
cer  incidence,  and  disease-speciﬁ c  mortality  in  the  general  population  . 
  J Natl Cancer Inst .      1993  ;  85  (  18  ):  1483   –   1492    . 

 6.       Tran     GD   ,    Sun     XD   ,    Abnet     CC  , et al    .   Prospective study of risk factors for 
esophageal  and  gastric  cancers  in  the  Linxian  general  population  trial 
cohort in China  .   Int J Cancer .      2005  ;  113  (  3  ):  456   –   463    . 

 7.       Liu      SF   ,     Shen      Q   ,     Dawsey      SM  ,  et  al    .    Esophageal  balloon  cytology  and 
subsequent  risk  of  esophageal  and  gastric-cardia  cancer  in  a  high-risk 
Chinese population  .   Int J Cancer .      1994  ;  57  (  6  ):  775   –   780    . 

  

  

 8.       McAlister     FA   ,    Straus     SE   ,    Sackett     DL   ,    Altman     DG    .   Analysis and reporting 

of factorial trials: a systematic review  .   JAMA .      2003  ;  289  (  19  ):  2545   –   2553    . 

 9.       Blot     WJ   ,    Li     JY   ,    Taylor     PR   ,    Guo     W   ,    Dawsey     SM   ,    Li     B    .   The Linxian trials: 
mortality  rates  by  vitamin-mineral  intervention  group  .    Am  J  Clin  Nutr .    
  1995  ;  62  :  1424S   –   1426S    . 

    10.       Qu     CX   ,    Kamangar     F   ,    Fan     JH  , et al    .   Chemoprevention of primary liver 
cancer: a randomized, double-blind trial in Linxian, China  .   J Natl Cancer 
Inst .      2007  ;  99  (  16  ):  1240   –   1247    . 

    11.       Gray     RJ    .   A class of K-sample test for comparing cumulative incidence of 

competing risk  .   Ann Stat .      1988  ;  16  :  1141   –   1154    . 

    12.       Fine     JP   ,    Gray     RJ    .   A proportional hazards model for the subdistribution of 

competing risk  .   J Am Stat Assoc .      1999  ;  94  :  496   –   509    . 

    13.       Mark     SD   ,    Qiao     YL   ,    Dawsey     SM  , et al    .   Prospective study of serum sele-
nium levels and incident esophageal and gastric cancers  .   J Natl Cancer Inst .    
  2000  ;  92  (  21  ):  1753   –   1763    . 

    14.       Taylor     PR   ,    Qiao     YL   ,    Abnet     CC  , et al    .   Prospective study of serum vitamin 
E  levels  and  esophageal  and  gastric  cancers  .    J  Natl  Cancer  Inst .       2003  ;  
95  (  18  ):  1414   –   1416    . 

    15.       Abnet      CC   ,     Qiao      YL   ,     Dawsey      SM  ,  et  al    .    Prospective  study  of  serum 
retinol,  beta-carotene,  beta-cryptoxanthin,  and  lutein/zeaxanthin  and 
esophageal  and  gastric  cancers  in  China  .    Cancer  Causes  Control .       2003  ;
  14  (  7  ):  645   –   655    . 

    16.       Wei     W   ,    Abnet     CC   ,    Qiao     YL  , et al    .   Prospective study of serum selenium 
concentration  and  esophageal  and  gastric  cardia  cancer,  heart  disease, 
stroke, and total death  .   Am J Clin Nutr .      2004  ;  79  (  1  ):  80   –   85    . 

    17.       Limburg     PJ   ,    Wei     W   ,    Ahnen     DJ  , et al    .   Randomized, placebo-controlled, 
esophageal squamous cell cancer chemoprevention trial of selenomethio-
nine and celecoxib  .   Gastroenterology .      2005  ;  129  (  3  ):  863   –   873    . 

    18.       Abnet     CC   ,    Lai     B   ,    Qiao     YL  , et al    .   Zinc concentration in esophageal biopsy 
specimens  measured  by  x-ray  ﬂ uorescence  and  esophageal  cancer  risk  .   
J Natl Cancer Inst .      2005  ;  97  (  4  ):  301   –   306    . 

    19.       Mark      SD   ,     Wang      W   ,     Fraumeni      JF      Jr  ,  et  al    .    Do  nutritional  supplements 

lower the risk of stroke or hypertension?     Epidemiology .      1998  ;  9  (  1  ):  9   –   15    . 

    20.       Mirvish     SS    .   Role of N-nitroso compounds (NOC) and N-nitrosation in 
etiology  of  gastric,  esophageal,  nasopharyngeal  and  bladder  cancer  and 
contribution  to  cancer  of  known  exposures  to  NOC  .    Cancer  Lett.    1995  ;
  93  (  1  ):  17   –   48    . 

    21.       Jenab     M   ,    Riboli     E   ,    Ferrari     P  , et al    .   Plasma and dietary vitamin C levels and 
risk of gastric cancer in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer 
and Nutrition (EPIC-EURGAST)  .   Carcinogenesis .      2006  ;  27  (  11  ):  2250   –   2257    . 
    22.       Simon     JA   ,    Hudes     ES   ,    Browner     WS    .   Serum ascorbic acid and cardiovascu-

lar disease prevalence in U.S. adults  .   Epidemiology .      1998  ;  9  (  3  ):  316   –   321    . 

    23.       Yokoyama     T   ,    Date     C   ,    Kokubo     Y   ,    Yoshiike     N   ,    Matsumura     Y   ,    Tanaka     H    . 
  Serum vitamin C concentration was inversely associated with subsequent 
20-year incidence of stroke in a Japanese rural community. The Shibata 
study  .   Stroke .      2000  ;  31  (  10  ):  2287   –   2294    . 

    24.       Kurl     S   ,    Tuomainen     TP   ,    Laukkanen     JA  , et al    .   Plasma vitamin C modiﬁ es 
the  association  between  hypertension  and  risk  of  stroke  .    Stroke .       2002  ;  
33  (  6  ):  1568   –   1573    . 

    25.       Waters     DD   ,    Alderman     EL   ,    Hsia     J  , et al    .   Effects of hormone replacement 
therapy and antioxidant vitamin supplements on coronary atherosclerosis 
in postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial  .   JAMA .      2002  ;  
288  (  19  ):  2432   –   2440    . 

    26.     Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection 
Study of antioxidant vitamin supplementation in 20,536 high-risk individu-
alsa randomised placebo-controlled trial  .   Lancet .      2002  ;  360  (  9325  ):  23   –   33       . 

    27.       Peto     R   ,    Doll     R   ,    Buckley     JD   ,    Sporn     MB    .   Can dietary beta-carotene materi-

ally reduce human cancer rates?     Nature .      1981  ;  290  (  5803  ):  201   –   208    . 

    28.     The ATBC Cancer Prevention Study Group. The effect of vitamin E and 
beta carotene on the incidence of lung cancer and other cancers in male 
smokers. The Alpha-TocopherolBeta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study 
Group  .   N Engl J Med .      1994  ;  330  (  15  ):  1029   –   1035    . 

    29.       Omenn     GS   ,    Goodman     GE   ,    Thornquist     MD  , et al    .   Effects of a combina-
tion  of  beta  carotene  and  vitamin  A  on  lung  cancer  and  cardiovascular 
disease  .   N Engl J Med .      1996  ;  334  (  18  ):  1150   –   1155    . 

    30.       Hennekens     CH   ,    Buring     JE   ,    Manson     JE  , et al    .   Lack of effect of long-term 
supplementation  with  beta  carotene  on  the  incidence  of  malignant  neo-
plasms and cardiovascular disease  .   N Engl J Med .      1996  ;  334  (  18  ):  1145   –   1149    . 

jnci.oxfordjournals.org   

JNCI

| Articles 517

    31.       Lee     IM   ,    Cook     NR   ,    Gaziano     JM  , et al    .   Vitamin E in the primary preven-
tion of cardiovascular disease and cancer: the Women’s Health Study: a 
randomized controlled trial  .   JAMA .      2005  ;  294  (  1  ):  56   –   65    . 

    32.       Taylor      PR    .    Prevention  of  gastric  cancer:  a  miss  .    J  Natl  Cancer  Inst .    

  2007  ;  99  (  2  ):  101   –   103    . 

    33.       Bjelakovic     G   ,    Nikolova     D   ,    Gluud     LL   ,    Simonetti     RG   ,    Gluud     C    .   Mortality in 
randomized trials of antioxidant supplements for primary and secondary pre-
vention: systematic review and meta-analysis  .   JAMA .      2007  ;  297  (  8  ):  842   –   857    . 
    34.       Yu     SY   ,    Zhu     YJ   ,    Li     WG  , et al    .   A preliminary report on the intervention trials 
of primary liver cancer in high-risk populations with nutritional supplemen-
tation of selenium in China  .   Biol Trace Elem Res.   1991  ;  29  (  3  ):  289   –   294    . 

    35.       Yu     SY   ,    Zhu     YJ   ,    Li     WG    .   Protective role of selenium against hepatitis B 
virus and primary liver cancer in Qidong  .   Biol Trace Elem Res.   1997  ;  56  (  1  ): 
 117   –   124    . 

    36.       Dufﬁ eld-Lillico     AJ   ,    Dalkin     BL   ,    Reid     ME  , et al    .   Selenium supplementa-
tion, baseline plasma selenium status and incidence of prostate cancer: an 
analysis of the complete treatment period of the Nutritional Prevention of 
Cancer Trial  .   BJU Int .      2003  ;  91  (  7  ):  608   –   612    . 

    37.       Zou     XN   ,    Taylor     PR   ,    Mark     SD  , et al    .   Seasonal variation of food consump-
tion and selected nutrient intake in Linxian, a high risk area for esophageal 
cancer in China  .   Int J Vitam Nutr Res.   2002  ;  72  (  6  ):  375   –   382    . 

    38.       Li      JY   ,     Taylor      PR   ,     Li      B  ,  et  al    .    Nutrition  intervention  trials  in  Linxian, 
China: multiple vitamin/mineral supplementation, cancer incidence, and 
disease-speciﬁ c mortality among adults with esophageal dysplasia  .   J Natl 
Cancer Inst .      1993  ;  85  (  18  ):  1492   –   1498    . 

    39.       Dufﬁ eld-Lillico     AJ   ,    Reid     ME   ,    Turnbull     BW  , et al    .   Baseline characteristics 
and the effect of selenium supplementation on cancer incidence in a ran-
domized clinical trial: a summary report of the Nutritional Prevention of 
Cancer Trial  .   Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev .      2002  ;  11  (  7  ):  630   –   639    . 

    40.       Omenn     GS   ,    Goodman     GE   ,    Thornquist     MD  , et al    .   Risk factors for lung 
cancer  and  for  intervention  effects  in  CARET,  the  Beta-Carotene  and 
Retinol Efﬁ cacy Trial  .   J Natl Cancer Inst .      1996  ;  88  (  21  ):  1550   –   1559    . 

    41.       Albanes     D   ,    Heinonen     OP   ,    Taylor     PR  , et al    .   Alpha-tocopherol and beta-
carotene supplements and lung cancer incidence in the Alpha-Tocopherol, 
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study: effects of base-line characteris-
tics and study compliance  .   J Natl Cancer Inst .      1996  ;  88  (  21  ):  1560   –   1570    . 

    42.       Virtamo     J   ,    Pietinen     P   ,    Huttunen     JK  , et al    .   Incidence of cancer and mortal-
ity  following  alpha-tocopherol  and  beta-carotene  supplementation:  a 
postintervention follow-up  .   JAMA .      2003  ;  290  (  4  ):  476   –   485    . 

    43.       Leppala      JM   ,     Virtamo      J   ,     Fogelholm      R  ,  et  al    .    Controlled  trial  of  alpha-
tocopherol and beta-carotene supplements on stroke incidence and mor-
tality in male smokers  .   Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol.   2000  ;  20  (  1  ):  230   –   235    . 

    44.       Tornwall      ME   ,     Virtamo      J   ,     Korhonen      PA   ,     Virtanen      MJ   ,     Albanes      D   , 
   Huttunen     JK    .   Postintervention effect of alpha tocopherol and beta caro-
tene  on  different  strokes:  a  6-year  follow-up  of  the  Alpha  Tocopherol, 
Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study  .   Stroke .      2004  ;  35  (  8  ):  1908   –   1913    . 

    45.       Goodman     GE   ,    Thornquist     MD   ,    Balmes     J  , et al    .   The Beta-Carotene and 
Retinol Efﬁ cacy Trial: incidence of lung cancer and cardiovascular disease 
mortality during 6-year follow-up after stopping beta-carotene and retinol 
supplements  .   J Natl Cancer Inst .      2004  ;  96  (  23  ):  1743   –   1750    . 

    46.       Baron     JA   ,    Beach     M   ,    Mandel     JS  , et al    .   Calcium supplements for the preven-
tion  of  colorectal  adenomas.  Calcium  Polyp  Prevention  Study  Group  . 
  N Engl J Med .      1999  ;  340  (  2  ):  101   –   107    . 

    47.       Grau     MV   ,    Baron     JA   ,    Sandler     RS  , et al    .   Prolonged effect of calcium supple-
mentation  on  risk  of  colorectal  adenomas  in  a  randomized  trial  .    J  Natl 
Cancer Inst .      2007  ;  99  (  2  ):  129   –   136    . 

    48.       Fisher     B   ,    Costantino     JP   ,    Wickerham     DL  , et al    .   Tamoxifen for the preven-
tion  of  breast  cancer:  current  status  of  the  National  Surgical  Adjuvant 
Breast  and  Bowel  Project  P-1  study  .    J  Natl  Cancer  Inst .       2005  ;  97  (  22  ): 
 1652   –   1662    . 

    49.       Cuzick     J   ,    Forbes     JF   ,    Sestak     I  , et al    .   Long-term results of tamoxifen pro-
phylaxis for breast cancer — 96-month follow-up of the randomized IBIS-I 
trial  .   J Natl Cancer Inst .      2007  ;  99  (  4  ):  272   –   282    . 

    50.       Powles      TJ   ,     Ashley      S   ,     Tidy      A   ,     Smith      IE   ,     Dowsett      M    .    Twenty-year 
follow-up  of  the  Royal  Marsden  randomized,  double-blinded  tamoxifen 
breast cancer prevention trial  .   J Natl Cancer Inst .      2007  ;  99  (  4  ):  283   –   290    .  

  Funding 
  National  Cancer  Institute   contracts  ( N01-SC-91030   and   N01-RC-47701   to 
 the  Cancer  Institute,  Chinese  Academy  of  Medical  Sciences );   the  Intramural 
Research  Program  of  the  Division  of  Cancer  Epidemiology  and  Genetics , 
 National Cancer Institute ,  National Institutes of Health ;  the Cancer Institute, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences .   

  Notes  
   The authors declare that they have no conﬂ ict of interest. The authors are solely 
responsible for the design of the study; the collection and analysis of data and 
the interpretation of the results; the preparation of the manuscript; and the deci-
sion to submit the manuscript for publication. The authors wish to thank the 
many citizens of Linxian who have faithfully participated in these studies over 
the past 20 years.   

   Manuscript  received    July      5  ,    2008    ;  revised    January      8  ,    2009    ;  accepted 

  February     2  ,   2009  .      

518   Articles | JNCI 

Vol. 101, Issue 7  |  April 1, 2009

International Research Conference

on Food, Nutrition & Cancer

Effect of White Versus Red Meat on Endogenous N-Nitrosation in the
Human Colon and Further Evidence of a Dose Response1

Sheila Anne Bingham,2 Roisin Hughes and Amanda Jane Cross
Medical Research Council, Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, Cambridge, U.K. CB2 2XY

ABSTRACT N-Nitroso compounds are found in the colon and are formed endogenously because amines and
amides are produced by bacterial decarboxylation of amino acids in the large gut. They can be N-nitrosated in the
presence of a nitrosating agent. To test the hypothesis that increased nitrogenous residues from red meat would
increase endogenous N-nitrosation, thus accounting for the epidemiologic association between red meat con-
sumption and colorectal cancer, we fed increased levels of red meat and measured apparent total N-nitroso
compounds (ATNCs) in fecal samples in a series of studies of volunteers maintained under controlled conditions.
A result of these studies is that we have shown a consistent dose response to red meat consumption. Fiber, in the
form of vegetables, bran or resistant starch, does not reduce the level of ATNCs formed, although transit time is
reduced and fecal weight are increased. Here we show that the equivalent amount (420 – 600 g) of meat as white
meat has no effect on fecal ATNCs in 12 volunteers (P ⫽ 0.338). At dosages of 0, 60, 120, 240 and 420 g of red
meat/d, mean levels of ATNC output are highly correlated with dose of meat: for concentration ATNC versus dose
of meat in g/d, r ⫽ 0.972, ␤ ⫽ 0.252 ng/g (SE 0.035); for total ATNC output versus dose of meat in g/d, r ⫽ 0.963,
␤ ⫽ 2.605 ␮g/d (SE 0.419). The effects of nonmeat protein and of heme on increased N-nitrosation and the
genotoxic effects of the ATNCs produced are presently being investigated.
J. Nutr. 132: 3522S–3525S, 2002.

KEY WORDS:

● white meat ●

red meat ● cancer ● colon ● N-nitroso compounds

Up to 80% of colorectal cancer cases have been attributed
to diet, suggesting that this cancer, the second most common
in Western countries, is a preventable disease (1). Armstrong
and Doll (2) attributed much of the international variation in
large bowel cancer incidence among countries to dietary dif-
ferences, especially meat and fat consumption. If meat is
associated with increased risk, lower rates for cancer would be
expected in vegetarians; in a meta-analysis of ﬁve cohorts,
non–meat eaters were not at lower risk than meat eaters (3).
However, in the largest study of these vegetarians versus meat
eaters, meat was associated with increased risk of colorectal
cancer (3,4). Two systematic reviews of meat consumption in
relation to colorectal cancer incidence were recently pub-
lished. In 13 prospective studies an increase of 100 g all meat
or red meat was associated with a signiﬁcant 12–17% increased
risk of colorectal cancer, and a signiﬁcant 49% increased risk
was found for a daily increase of 25 g processed meat (5). In 34

1 Presented as part of a symposium, “International Research Conference on
Food, Nutrition & Cancer,” given by the American Institute for Cancer Research
and the World Cancer Research Fund International
in Washington, D.C., July
11–12, 2002. This conference was sponsored by BASF Aktiengesellschaft; Cali-
fornia Dried Plum Board; The Campbell Soup Company; Danisco Cultor; Galileo
Laboratories, Inc.; Mead Johnson Nutritionals; Roche Vitamins, Inc.; and Yama-
nouchi/Shaklee/INOBYS. Guest editors for this symposium were Helen Norman
and Ritva Butrum, American Institute for Cancer Research, Washington, D.C.
20009.

2 To whom correspondence should be addressed

E-mail: S. Bingham@mrc-dunn.cam.ac.uk.

case-control studies and 14 cohort studies average relative risk
was 1.35 [conﬁdence interval 3(CI 1.21–1.51)] for red meat
and 1.31 (CI 1.13–1.51) for processed meat (nitrite treated,
cured or smoked, including lunch meats) and meat products
and there was no signiﬁcant association with total meat (6). In
contrast, white meat consumption has been associated with
decreased risk in two prospective studies (7,8).

One explanation for the association between meat and
colorectal cancer is the presence of N-nitroso compounds
(NOCs) formed endogenously within the colon. NOCs are
formed because the amines and amides produced primarily by
bacterial decarboxylation of amino acids can be N-nitrosated
in the presence of a nitrosating agent (9,10). A number of
facultative and anaerobic colonic bacteria can catalyze the
formation of NOCs at optimum pH 7.5 (11–13). In the
anaerobic large bowel, nitrate is reduced during dissimilatory
nitrate metabolism by the colonic ﬂora to nitrite from which
nitrosating agents may be formed. Supplements of nitrate have
therefore been shown to elevate fecal NOCs (14). N-Nitrosa-
tion in the colon has been demonstrated in animals and shown
to be dependent on the presence of gut ﬂora (15).

Meat increases the level of nitrogenous residues reaching
the colon (16) so that meat might be expected to increase
colonic level of NOCs. We previously showed that fecal NOC

3 Abbreviations used: ATNC, apparent total N-nitroso compound; CI, conﬁ-

dence interval; NOC, N-nitroso compound.

0022-3166/02 $3.00 © 2002 American Society for Nutritional Sciences.

3522S

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/132/11/3522S/4687166
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

MEAT AND ENDOGENOUS NOC FORMATION

3523S

TABLE 1

Effect of 420 – 600 g/d of red meat on fecal N-nitroso compound levels compared with the effects of 60 g/d red meat

and 420 – 600 g/d of white meat in 12 male volunteers

60 g meat

High red meat

High white meat

Item

ATNCs, ␮g/g3

Means

572

SD

349

ATNCs, ␮g/d

70.4

40.5

Fecal weight, g/d

Mean transit time, h

131

64

49

28

Means

2104

249

121

66

SD

1524

167

32

33

Means

759

87

124

72

SD

528

55

41

41

P1,2

0.0141
0.0012
0.3383
0.0091
0.0092
0.4083
0.6901
0.3902
0.5143
0.2421
0.7052
0.2993

1 High white meat vs high red meat.
2 High red meat vs low red meat.
3 High white meat vs low meat.
ATNCs, apparent total N-nitroso compounds.

excretion increases during high–red meat diets (17,18) and
that a dose response exists (19). We also showed that an
increase in fermentable carbohydrate entering the colon in the
form of vegetables, bran or resistant starch did not reduce
levels of NOCs produced, although these dietary factors will
decrease transit time, increase fecal weight and dilute the
contents of
risk
(17,18,20).

the large bowel,

reducing cancer

thus

We have been unable to show an effect of white meat on
endogenous N-nitrosation but have only studied two individ-
uals so far (17). Hence the effect of white meat in 12 individ-
uals, at two different levels, is reported here. In addition, the
effect of 120 g red meat on endogenous N-nitrosation in nine
volunteers is added to previously published data showing a
dose-response effect to 60, 240 and 480 g of red meat/d (19).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Subjects and diets. Eighteen healthy male volunteers (aged
24 –74 y) were studied in a metabolic suite. During this time only food
that was provided from a standardized menu of normal food was
permitted to be eaten. All diets were constant in fat and nonstarch
polysaccharide (dietary ﬁber) and adjusted for the energy needs for
each subject with extra bread, low-fat margarine and marmalade.
Energy requirements ranged from 10 to 12.5 MJ/d. In protocol 1,
seven subjects were studied for three 10-d dietary periods of 60 g red
meat, 600 g red meat (as beef and pork) and 600 g white meat (as
chicken, turkey or white cod). In protocol 2, ﬁve subjects were
studied for three 15-d periods. The diets were the same as in protocol
1 except that 420 g red and white meat rather than 600 g was used.
In protocol 3, nine subjects were fed 60 and 120 g red meat for 15 d
each. To equalize the energy content of the diets, a glucose polymer
drink and cream were substituted for meat on the 60- and 120-g diets.
All other items of food on each diet of the protocols were the same.
Deionized water was given throughout for drinking and used in
cooking to keep nitrate intake constant. Diets were randomly as-
signed by using a crossover design and subjects were their own
control. Permission for the studies was given by the Dunn Human
Nutrition Unit and Addenbrookes Hospital ethics committees.

Protocols. All fecal samples were collected and stored at ⫺20°C
except for those collected on days 8 –10 in protocol 1 and 13 and 14
in protocols 2 and 3. These samples were processed to prepare
homogenates within 20 min of excretion. Each sample was diluted

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/132/11/3522S/4687166
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

fourfold with ultrapure deionized water, homogenized in a stomacher
(Colworth 3500, Seward) for 20 min and centrifuged at 4500 rpm for
10 min. Each supernatant was ﬁltered, distributed into aliquots and
stored at ⫺20°C. Fecal homogenates were analyzed for NOCs and
nitrite by the release of nitric oxide after chemical denitrosation via
thermal energy analysis (21). NOCs detected by this group-selective
method are referred to as apparent total NOCs (ATNCs). All sam-
ples collected during the study were weighed and radiographed, and
recoveries of radiopaque fecal markers (22) were noted.

RESULTS

In protocol 1, 96% of the total fecal markers administered
were recovered (i.e., 4% of markers were present in specimens
not collected after the experimental period). In protocol 2, the
mean number of markers recovered in the fecal samples by
x-ray analysis was 99.0%, and the mean marker recovery from
each volunteer ranged from 98.8% to 99.2%. In protocol 3,
mean marker recovery was 97.7% (range 99.9 –99.6%).

The mean results for all 12 subjects from protocols 1 and 2
are shown in Table 1. Both the concentration of ATNCs and
the output per day were signiﬁcantly higher when the diets
with 420 – 600 g red meat were fed compared with the diet
with 60 g meat (P ⫽ 0.001, P ⫽ 0.009, respectively). However,
ATNC levels when the diets with 420 – 600 g white meat were
fed were not signiﬁcantly different from the low-meat diet (P
⫽ 0.338 and P ⫽ 0.408, respectively, for concentration and
output per day) and were signiﬁcantly lower than those ob-
tained with the diet with 420 – 600 g red meat (P ⫽ 0.014, P
⫽ 0.009, respectively, for concentration and output).

Figure 1 shows individual values of fecal ATNC concen-
tration as a the percentage change from the 60-g red meat diet.
All subjects increased their fecal ATNC concentration on the
high–red meat diet, but there was a large individual variation
in response. Four
subjects exhibited a fourfold increase,
whereas eight subjects increased levels by 1–2.5 times. ATNC
levels in all subjects decreased on changing from the high–red
meat diet to the high–white meat diet to levels found on the
low-meat diet except for two subjects consuming the 600-g
high–white meat diet in whom levels increased on changing to
the white meat diet.

3524S

SUPPLEMENT

fecal ATNC excretion during the study was due to endogenous
intestinal formation. This formation is not due to an increase
in the amount of nitrosating agents, such as nitrate, because
nitrate levels have been kept constant throughout to avoid
interference from this factor. An equivalent amount of protein
as white meat in this study had no effect; therefore increased
endogenous production of nitric oxide from oxidation by nitric
oxide synthase of the extra L-arginine present in the high-meat
diets is unlikely to account for any increase (23). The 420-g
red meat diet would have provided ⬃7.3 g arginine compared
with 1.04 g from the 60-g diet (24).

Despite the consistent response to meat, there is substantial
individual variation in the extent of response (Fig. 1). This
individual variation remains despite the highly controlled
conditions under which studies are carried out. The individual
variation may arise from individual differences in gut ﬂora,
with high responders harboring high populations of nitric
oxide–producing bacteria. Alternatively,
individual differ-
ences in iron or protein absorption would alter the amount of
precursors available for N-nitrosation entering the colon. Iron
is required for nitrate reductase activity, which is responsible
for bacterially mediated N-nitrosation (11–13).

Although red meat resulted in the expected increase in
endogenous N-nitrosation in this study, the same amount of
white meat had no effect in 10 of 12 volunteers; therefore
mean fecal ATNC levels were not signiﬁcantly different from
those found in a diet with 60 g of meat. In vitro work has
shown that the heme proteins myoglobin and hemoglobin in
meat react with nitric oxide under anaerobic conditions to
form nitrosating agents with the ability to nitrosate phenol
(25). Under certain conditions, hemes are known to be nitro-
sated and act as nitrosating agents (26). The formation of
N-nitrosoarginine by heme enzymes under anaerobic condi-
tions was also demonstrated (27). Red meat is a much richer
source of heme iron than is white meat; therefore the lack of
effect of white meat may be due to a comparative absence of
heme. Present studies are investigating the effect of heme on
endogenous N-nitrosation (28).

Many classes of NOC have been identiﬁed, including ni-
trosamines, nitrosamides and nitrosoguanidines, and a number
of these are known to cause DNA damage after the formation
of alkylating agents during NOC metabolism. Methylnitro-
sourea was shown to induce G3 A transitions at codons 12

FIGURE 2 Dose response to 0, 60, 240 and 420 g of meat/d and
to 120 g of meat/d (from reference 19 and this study). Eight subjects
were studied at the 0-, 240- and 420-g level, 9 at the 120-g level and 17
at the 60-g level. Mean and SEM bars are shown.

FIGURE 1

Individual changes in fecal ATNC concentration in 12
individuals fed a low-meat (60 g) diet, a high–red meat (420 – 600 g) diet
and a high–white meat (420 – 600 g) diet. Subjects 1–7 were in group 1
(600 g meat), and subjects 8 –12 were in group 2 (420 g meat).

In protocol 3, mean levels of ATNC concentration were
764 ␮g 䡠 kg⫺1 (SD 698) on the low-meat diet and 1164 ␮g 䡠 g⫺1
(SD 1555; P ⫽ 0.205) on the high meat diet. ATNC output on
the low-meat diet was 77 ␮g/d (SD 27) compared with 125
␮g/d (SD 125) on the high-meat diet (P ⫽ 0.209). Figure 2
shows mean values for fecal NOC concentration using com-
bined results from those already published (19) and the results
from these nine individuals studied in protocol 3 (n ⫽ 17 for
the 60-g level). Although differences between the 60- and
120-g levels in protocol 3 were not signiﬁcant, mean levels of
fecal ATNCs on the 120-g red meat diet were intermediate
between those obtained from the 60-g and 240-g diets (Fig. 2).
Mean levels of NOC output were highly correlated with dose
of meat: for ng of ATNCs/g versus dose of g of meat/d, r
⫽ 0.972, b ⫽ 0.252 (SE 0.035), and for ␮g of ATNCs/d versus
dose of g of meat/d, r ⫽ 0.963, b ⫽ 2.605 (SE 0.419).

DISCUSSION

The inﬂuence of red meat on fecal ATNC excretion has now
been shown in more than 50 healthy male volunteers, all of
whom were studied in this study and four previous studies from
our laboratory in a metabolic suite where diet could be carefully
controlled (17–20). The direction of increase with increasing
meat is consistent in nearly all individuals. Furthermore, Figure 2
shows there is a dose response that occurs at normal levels of
120 g of meat/d in addition to the higher levels of 240 and 420 g/d
published elsewhere (19). Under these controlled conditions, the
dose of red meat was highly predictive of average fecal ATNCs,
with R2 values of 0.97 and 0.96 for concentration and output per
day, respectively. At the higher levels of meat consumption,
concentrations of ATNCs are of the same order of magnitude as
the concentration of tobacco-speciﬁc NOCs in cigarette smoke
(11,17). We previously showed that fermentable carbohydrate
does not change fecal NOC output (17,18,20). In this study, the
nonstarch polysaccharide (ﬁber) contents of the diets were the
same and diet had no effect on fecal weight and mean transit time
(Table 1).

A high–red meat diet containing 600 g of meat/d provides
only 13 ␮g of preformed ATNCs/d (18). Fecal ATNC levels
exceeded this value in all subjects studied so far, showing that

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/132/11/3522S/4687166
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

MEAT AND ENDOGENOUS NOC FORMATION

3525S

and 13 in rat colon tumors and is used to induce colon cancer
in rat models (29). Endogenous N-nitrosation may thus be the
mechanism behind the increased risk of colorectal cancer from
red meat, but further work is required to establish the geno-
toxicity and carcinogenicity of these compounds present in the
colon, especially when large amounts of red meat are con-
sumed.

LITERATURE CITED
(1995) Diet, nutrition and avoidable cancer. Environ.

1. Willett, W. C.

Health Perspect. 103: 165–170.
2. Armstrong, B. & Doll, R.

(1975) Environmental factors and cancer inci-

dence in different countries. Int. J Cancer 15: 617– 631.

3. Key, T., Fraser, G. E, Thorogood, M., Appleby, P. N., Beral, V., Reeves, G.,
Burr, M. L., Chang-Claude, J., Frentzel-Beyme, R., Kuzma, J. W., Mann, J. &
McPherson, K.
(1998) Mortality in vegetarians and non-vegetarians: detailed
ﬁndings from a collaborative analysis of ﬁve prospective studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
70: S516 –S524.

4. Fraser, G. E.

(1999) Diet and chronic disease in Seventh Day Ad-

ventists. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 70: 532–538.

5. Sandhu, M. S., White, I. R.. & McPherson, K.

(2001) Systematic review
of the prospective studies on meat consumption and colorectal cancer risk
cancer. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 10: 439 – 446.

6. Norat, T., Lukanova, A., Ferrari, P. & Riboli, E.

(2002) Meat consumption
and colorectal cancer risk: dose-response meta-analysis of epidemiological stud-
ies. Int. J. Cancer 98: 241–256.

7. Willett, W. C., Stampfer, M. J., Colditz, G. A., Rosner, B. A.. & Speizer,
(1990) Relation of meat, fat and ﬁber intake to the risk of colon cancer in

F. E.
a prospective study among women. N. Engl. J. Med. 323: 1664 –1672.

8. Giovanucci, E., Rimm, E. B., Stampfer, M. J., Colditz, G., Ascherio, A. &
Intake of fat, meat, and ﬁber in relation to risk of colon

(1994)

Willett, W. C.
cancer in men. Cancer Res. 54: 2390 –2397.

9. Mirvish, S. S.

(1995) Role of N-nitrosocompounds (NOC) and N-nitro-
sation in etiology of gastric, esophageal, nasopharyngeal and bladder cancer and
contribution to cancer of known exposures to NOC. Cancer Lett. 93: 17– 48.

10. Tricker, A. R.

(1997) N-Nitrosocompounds and man: sources of expo-
sure, endogenous formation and occurrence in body ﬂuids. Eur. J. Cancer Prev.
6: 226 –268. 7.

11. Calmels, S., Ohshima, H., Vincent, P., Gounot, A. M. & Bartsch, H.
(1985) Screening of microorganisms for nitrosation catalysis at pH 7 and kinetic
studies on nitrosamine formation from secondary amines by E. coli strains.
Carcinogenesis 6: 911–915.

12. Calmels, S., Ohshima, H. & Bartsch, H.

(1988) Nitrosamine formation
by denitrifying and non denitrifying bacteria: implication of nitrite reductase and
nitrate reductase in nitrosation catalysis. J. Gen. Microbiol. 134: 221–226.

13. Calmels, S., Ohshima, H., Henry, Y. & Bartsch, H.

(1996) Characteri-
sation of bacterial cytochrome cd1-nitrite reductase as one enzyme responsible
for catalysis of secondary amines. Carcinogenesis 17: 533–5368.

14. Rowland, I. R., Granli, T., Bockman, O. C., Key, P. E. & Massey, R. C.
(1991) Endogenous N-nitrosation in man assessed by measurement of apparent
total N-nitroso compounds in faeces. Carcinogenesis 12: 1395–1401.

15. Massey, R. C., Key, P. E., Mallett, A. K. & Rowland, I. R.

(1991) An
investigation of the endogenous formation of apparent total N-nitroso com-
pounds in conventional ﬂora and germ-free rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 26: 595–
600.

16. Silvester, K. R. & Cummings, J. H.

(1995) Does digestibility of meat

protein help to explain large bowel cancer risk? Nutr. Cancer 24: 279 –288.

17. Bingham, S. A., Pignatelli, B., Pollock, J. R. A., Ellul, A., Malaveille, C.,
Gross, G., Runswick, S., Cummings, J. H. & O’Neill, I. K.
(1996) Does increased
endogenous formation of N-nitroso compounds in the human colon explain the
association between red meat and colon cancer? Carcinogenesis 17: 515–523.
18. Silvester, K. R., Bingham, S. A., Pollock, J. R. A., Cummings, J. H. &
O’Neill, I. K.
(1997) Effect of meat and resistant starch on fecal excretion of
apparent total N-nitroso compounds and ammonia from the human large bowel.
Nutr. Cancer 29: 13–23.

19. Hughes, R., Cross, A., Pollock, J. & Bingham, S.

(2001) Dose depen-
dent effect of dietary meat on colonic endogenous N-nitrosation. Carcinogenesis
22: 199 –202.

20. Hughes, R., Pollock, J. R. A. & Bingham, S. A.

21. Pignatelli, B., Richard, I., Bourgade, M. C. & Bartsch, H.

(2002) Effect of vegeta-
bles, tea and soya on endogenous N-nitrosation, faecal ammonia and faecal
water genotoxicity during a high red meat diet in humans. Nutr. Cancer (in press).
(1987) An
improved method for analysis of total N-nitroso compounds in gastric juice. In:
The Relevance of N-Nitroso Compounds to Human Cancer: Exposures and
Mechanisms (Bartsch, H., O’Neill,
IARC
Scientiﬁc Publications, Lyon, No. 84.

I. K. & Schultz-Hermann, R., eds.),

22. Cummings, J. H., Jenkins, D. J. & Wiggins, H. S.

(1976) Measurement
of the mean transit time of dietary residue through the human gut. Gut 3:
210 –218.

23. Forstermann, U., Schmidt, H. H. H. W. & Pollock, J. R. A.

(1991)
Isoforms of nitric oxide synthase. Characterization and puriﬁcation from different
cell types. Biochem. Pharmacol. 42: 1849 –1857.

24. Paul, A. A. & Southgate, D. A. T.

(1978) McCance and Widowson’s The

Composition of Food, 4th ed, HMSO, London.

25. Wade, R. S. & Castro, C. E.

(1990) Redox reactivity of iron(III) porphy-
rins and heme proteins with nitric oxide. Nitrosyl transfer to carbon, oxygen,
nitrogen and sulphur. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 3: 289 –291.

26. Bonnett, R., Charalambrides, A. A., Martin, R. A., Sales, K. D. & Fitzsim-
(1975) Reactions of nitrous acid and nitric oxide with porphyrins and

mons, W.
haem. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1975, 884 – 885.

27. Hirst, J. & Goodin, D. B.

(2000) Unusual oxidative chemistry of N-
hydroxyarginine and H-hydroyguanidine catalysed at an engineered cavity in
heme peroxidase. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 8582– 8591.

28. Cross, A. J., Pollock, J. R. A. & Bingham, S. A. Red Meat and Colorectal
Cancer Risk: The Effect of Dietary Iron and Haem on Endogenous N-Nitrosation
(in press IARC Scientiﬁc Press).

29. Jakoby, R. F., Alexander, R. J., Raicht, R. F. & Brasitus, T. A.

(1992) K-
ras oncogene mutations in rat colon tumours induced by MNU. Carcinogenesis
13: 45– 49.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/132/11/3522S/4687166
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

ORIGINAL CONTRIBUTION

Influence of a Diet Very High in Vegetables,
Fruit, and Fiber and Low in Fat on Prognosis
Following Treatment for Breast Cancer
The Women’s Healthy Eating
and Living (WHEL) Randomized Trial
John P. Pierce, PhD
Loki Natarajan, PhD
Bette J. Caan, DrPh
Barbara A. Parker, MD
E. Robert Greenberg, MD
Shirley W. Flatt, MS
Cheryl L. Rock, PhD, RD
Sheila Kealey, MPH
Wael K. Al-Delaimy, MD, PhD
Wayne A. Bardwell, PhD
Robert W. Carlson, MD
Jennifer A. Emond, MS
Susan Faerber, BA
Ellen B. Gold, PhD
Richard A. Hajek, PhD
Kathryn Hollenbach, PhD
Lovell A. Jones, PhD
Njeri Karanja, PhD
Lisa Madlensky, PhD
James Marshall, PhD
Vicky A. Newman, MS, RD
Cheryl Ritenbaugh, PhD, MPH
Cynthia A. Thomson, PhD
Linda Wasserman, MD, PhD

Context Evidence is lacking that a dietary pattern high in vegetables, fruit, and fiber
and low in total fat can influence breast cancer recurrence or survival.
Objective To assess whether a major increase in vegetable, fruit, and fiber intake
and a decrease in dietary fat intake reduces the risk of recurrent and new primary breast
cancer and all-cause mortality among women with previously treated early stage breast
cancer.
Design, Setting, and Participants Multi-institutional randomized controlled trial
of dietary change in 3088 women previously treated for early stage breast cancer who
were 18 to 70 years old at diagnosis. Women were enrolled between 1995 and 2000
and followed up through June 1, 2006.
Intervention The intervention group (n=1537) was randomly assigned to receive a
telephone counseling program supplemented with cooking classes and newsletters that
promoted daily targets of 5 vegetable servings plus 16 oz of vegetable juice; 3 fruit serv-
ings; 30 g of fiber; and 15% to 20% of energy intake from fat. The comparison group
(n=1551) was provided with print materials describing the “5-A-Day” dietary guidelines.
Main Outcome Measures Invasive breast cancer event (recurrence or new pri-
mary) or death from any cause.
Results From comparable dietary patterns at baseline, a conservative imputation analy-
sis showed that the intervention group achieved and maintained the following statis-
tically significant differences vs the comparison group through 4 years: servings of veg-
etables, ⫹65%; fruit, ⫹25%; fiber, ⫹30%, and energy intake from fat, −13%. Plasma
carotenoid concentrations validated changes in fruit and vegetable intake. Through-
out the study, women in both groups received similar clinical care. Over the mean
7.3-year follow-up, 256 women in the intervention group (16.7%) vs 262 in the com-
parison group (16.9%) experienced an invasive breast cancer event (adjusted hazard
ratio, 0.96; 95% confidence interval, 0.80-1.14; P=.63), and 155 intervention group
women (10.1%) vs 160 comparison group women (10.3%) died (adjusted hazard ra-
tio, 0.91; 95% confidence interval, 0.72-1.15; P=.43). No significant interactions were
observed between diet group and baseline demographics, characteristics of the origi-
nal tumor, baseline dietary pattern, or breast cancer treatment.
Conclusion Among survivors of early stage breast cancer, adoption of a diet that
was very high in vegetables, fruit, and fiber and low in fat did not reduce additional
breast cancer events or mortality during a 7.3-year follow-up period.
Trial Registration clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00003787
JAMA. 2007;298(3):289-298

Marcia L. Stefanick, PhDCONSIDERABLE EVIDENCE FROM

preclinical studies indicates
that plant-derived foods con-
tain anticarcinogens.1 A com-
prehensive review of the literature
found that a diet high in vegetables and

For editorial comment see p 335.

fruit probably decreases breast cancer
risk and that a diet high in total fat pos-
sibly increases risk.2 However, evi-
dence of an association between a diet

Author Affiliations are listed at the end of this ar-
ticle.
Corresponding Author: John P. Pierce, PhD, Cancer
Prevention and Control Program, Moores UCSD Can-
cer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0901 (jppierce@ucsd.edu).

www.jama.com

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 289

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

high in vegetables and fruit and low in
total fat and prevention of cancer pro-
gression has been mixed in epidemio-
logical studies.3-17 An interim analysis
of data from the Women’s Interven-
tion Nutrition Study (WINS), which as-
sessed the effect of a dietary interven-
tion designed to reduce fat intake on
relapse-free survival in breast cancer pa-
tients,18 found that the intervention was
associated with a marginally statisti-
cally significant improvement in re-
lapse-free survival. To our knowledge,
no other clinical trials investigating di-
etary change and breast cancer sur-
vival have been reported.

The Women’s Healthy Eating and
Living (WHEL) Study was a random-
ized trial assessing whether a dietary
pattern very high in vegetables, fruit,
and fiber and low in fat reduces the risks
of recurrent and new primary breast
cancer and all-cause mortality among
women with previously treated early
stage breast cancer. The study was based
on the recommendations of a national
committee of experts called to re-
spond to a 1993 challenge grant from
a private philanthropist who believed
that the role of diet in preventing can-
cer progression deserved scientific study
to enable cancer survivors to make de-
cisions without having “to rely on folk-
lore, rumor and hearsay.”19

METHODS
Details of the study design, eligibility
criteria, randomization procedures, and
dietary intervention have been re-
ported previously.20,21 In brief, we com-
pared 2 dietary patterns: an interven-
tion group that was intensively
counseled to adopt a dietary pattern
very high in vegetables, fruit, and fi-
ber and low in fat21 and a comparison
group advised to follow the 5-A-Day
diet.22,23 The study tested primary hy-
potheses of whether the intervention di-
etary pattern was associated with (1) a
longer breast cancer event–free inter-
val and (2) increased overall survival
among women previously treated for
early stage breast cancer. Based on the
6 epidemiological studies that had been
published at the time of the trial de-

sign, we estimated the likely effect size
of this multicomponent diet.20 Follow-
ing Lachin and Foulkes,24 we deter-
mined that a sample size of 3000 would
have 82% power to detect a 19% re-
duction in additional breast cancer
events in the intervention group (ex-
pected comparison group rate=24%)
and a 24% reduction in all cause mor-
tality (expected comparison group
rate=15%).

Participants
Participants were enrolled at 7 study
sites between 1995 and 2000. Eligibil-
ity criteria included diagnosis of a pri-
mary operable invasive breast carci-
noma categorized using American Joint
Committee on Cancer (edition IV) cri-
teria as stage I (ⱖ1 cm), stage II, or stage
IIIA within the past 4 years; age at di-
agnosis between 18 and 70 years; treat-
ment with axillary dissection and total
mastectomy or lumpectomy followed
by primary breast radiation; no cur-
rent or planned chemotherapy; no evi-
dence of recurrent disease or new breast
cancer since completion of initial lo-
cal treatment; and no other cancer in
the past 10 years. Eligible women were
randomly assigned to either the study
dietary pattern or the comparison group
(FIGURE 1). The institutional review
boards at the 7 clinical sites approved
the study protocol and consent forms,
and all participants provided written in-
formed consent.

Dietary Intervention
The intensive intervention was deliv-
ered primarily by telephone counsel-
ing, supplemented with 12 cooking
classes in the first year and monthly
newsletters throughout the study.
Trained counselors21 followed a com-
puter-assisted protocol that was based
on social cognitive theory25 and had 3
phases of decreasing intensity. During
the first phase (3-8 calls in 4-6 weeks),
counselors focused on building self-
efficacy to implement the study tar-
gets, which consisted of daily intake of
5 vegetable servings plus 16 oz of veg-
etable juice, 3 fruit servings, 30 g of fi-
ber, and 15% to 20% of energy intake

from fat. Phase 2 (through 5 months)
focused on self-monitoring and dealt
with barriers to adherence. Phase 3
(through study completion) focused on
retaining motivation for the study di-
etary pattern and preventing setbacks.
During the first year of the interven-
tion, participants received an average
of 18 counseling calls, attended an av-
erage of 4 of 12 offered cooking classes,
and received 12 study newsletters. By
4 years, a key point for assessing long-
term effect, these participants had re-
ceived an average of 31 calls and 48
newsletters.

Women randomized to the compari-
son group were provided with print ma-
terials (from the US Department of Ag-
riculture26 and the National Cancer
Institute22,23) describing a diet with a
recommended daily intake of 5 serv-
ings of vegetables and fruit, more than
20 g of fiber, and less than 30% total
energy intake from fat. The compari-
son group attended an average of 1 of
4 offered cooking classes in the first year
and received 24 newsletters tailored to
the comparison group during the first
4 years.

Data Collection
Dietary Assessment. Dietary intake was
assessed by sets of 4 prescheduled 24-
hour dietary recalls conducted by tele-
phone on random days over a 3-week
period, stratified for weekend vs week-
days.20 These dietary recalls were sched-
uled for all participants at baseline, 1
year, 4 years, and 6 years and on 50%
random samples at 6, 24, and 36 months.
We report data for participants complet-
ing follow-up assessments. We also con-
ducted additional analyses as follows: for
participants who did not complete fol-
low-up assessments we imputed esti-
mates by assuming that they changed di-
etary intake in a manner similar to
comparison group respondents, using
the expectation maximization algo-
rithm in SAS software, version 9.1 (SAS
Institute Inc, Cary, North Carolina).27 As
previously described,20 dietary asses-
sors completed a training program and
used the multipass software-driven re-
call protocol of the Nutritional Data Sys-

290 JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 (Reprinted)

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

tem software (NDS-R, 1994-2006, Uni-
versity of Minnesota, Minneapolis). To
assess overall adherence, we developed
an adherence score.20 A completely ad-
herent participant would score 600
points: 300 points reflected vegetable
consumption and the remaining 300
points were divided equally among fi-
ber, fruit, and energy from fat.

Other Data Collection. We collected
adetailedfamilyhistoryofcanceratbase-
line and used the mutation prevalence
tables from Myriad Genetic Laboratories
(Salt Lake City, Utah)28 to classify fami-
lies with at least a 10% risk of a BRCA1/2
mutation as high-risk. Clinic visits con-
ducted at baseline, 1 year, 2 or 3 years
(randomly determined), 4 years, and 6
years included measured weight and ve-
nipuncture. Separated blood samples
were stored in cryovials in −80°C freez-
ers for later analysis. Participants were
mailed a set of study questionnaires to
complete and bring to each clinic visit,
including a health status questionnaire
with questions on recent physician vis-
its and 2 questionnaires used in the
Women’s Health Initiative: the Personal
Habits Questionnaire,29 which included
a9-itemmeasureofphysicalactivityvali-
dated for our study30 and from which we
calculatedmetabolicequivalenttaskmin-
utes per week,31 and the Thoughts and
FeelingsQuestionnaire,32whichincluded
measures of psychosocial functioning.
Each participant self-reported race/
ethnicity as 1 of 8 categories.

Assessment of Study Outcomes
Primary study end points were (1) the
combined outcome of invasive breast
cancer recurrence or new primary
breast cancer and (2) death due to any
cause. Recurrences were further clas-
sified as local/regional or distant me-
tastasis. Carcinoma in situ was not
counted as a study outcome. The breast
cancer event–free interval was defined
as the time from date of enrollment to
development of a new breast cancer
event. Follow-up time was censored at
the time of the participant’s death, at
the last documented staff contact date,
or at the study completion date (June
1, 2006).

Figure 1. Participant Flow

7572 Breast cancer patients screened

4463 Excluded

2864 Did not meet inclusion criteria
1284 Declined to participate
315 Unable to complete run-in

within 6 mo

3107 Randomized

2 Completed run-in

but refused randomizationa

1546 Randomized to intervention group
9 Excluded postrandomization

1561 Randomized to comparison group
10 Excluded postrandomization

2 Ineligible due to another breast

cancer event prior to randomization

2 No evidence of axillary dissection
1 Another cancer within 10-y window
1 Stage I tumor <1 cm
2 Ductal carcinoma in situ in
contralateral breast prior to
randomization
1 Crohn disease

1537 Received allocated intervention

as randomized

Status at end of study

(June 1, 2006)

1465 Vital status confirmed
1471 Breast cancer status confirmed

16 Lost to follow-up
22 Withdrew consent

5 Ineligible due to another breast

cancer event prior to randomization

3 No evidence of axillary dissection
1 Another cancer within 10-y window
1 Stage I tumor <1 cm

1551 Received allocated intervention

as randomized

Status at end of study

(June 1, 2006)

1488 Vital status confirmed
1500 Breast cancer status confirmed

8 Lost to follow-up
19 Withdrew consent

1537 Included in primary analysis

1551 Included in primary analysis

aNot included in analysis.

During semiannual telephone inter-
views, clinical site staff queried study par-
ticipants regarding the occurrence of out-
come events, any hospitalization, or new
or existing medical diagnoses. Any re-
port of a breast cancer event or death trig-
gered a confirmation interview and col-
lection of medical records and/or death
certificates. Two independent oncolo-
gists reviewed the medical records (pa-
thology reports and physician notes) to
confirm reported recurrences. In cases
of disagreement, the coordinating cen-
ter pathologist adjudicated the out-
come. Finally, we searched the Na-
tional Death Index using Social Security
number, name, and date of birth.

Statistical Analysis
Participants were randomly assigned to
the intervention or comparison group
using a random permuted-block design
stratified by tumor stage, age, and clini-
cal site. The allocation of participants was

conducted by the clinical site coordina-
tor running the study’s randomization
computer program, which automati-
cally stamped the assigned study group
in the database. An independent data and
safety monitoring committee con-
ducted a blind review of potential post-
randomization exclusions.20

Baseline group comparisons of demo-
graphic, anthropometric, clinical, and
dietary measures were conducted with
2-sided t tests, rank-sum tests, or ␹2
tests. We based the primary analysis of
disease-free survival on the intention-
to-treat principle using time-to-event
methods. A 2-sided log-rank test was
performed with P⬍.041 considered sta-
tistically significant (to account for in-
terim analyses undertaken at the re-
quest of the data and safety monitoring
committee). Both unadjusted and ad-
justed hazard ratios were computed. We
fit a Cox model stratified by stage, age,
and clinical site.

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 291

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

The frequencies of antiestrogen
therapy use and bilateral oophorecto-
mies differed marginally between study
groups at baseline; therefore, these co-
variates were also included in the model.
However, the antiestrogen therapy vari-
able did not satisfy the proportional haz-
ards assumption; hence, the analysis was
stratified by this covariate.33 Thus, the fi-
nal model was stratified by stage of ini-
tial tumor, age at randomization, clini-
cal site, and antiestrogen use and was
adjusted for oophorectomy status.

The a priori analysis plan20 in-
cluded fitting a Cox proportional haz-
ards model to evaluate the effect of the
intervention on key covariates. These
included stage of disease (classified as
I, II, or III), age at randomization (⬍55
years vs ⱖ55 years), hormone recep-
tor characteristics of initial tumor, body
mass index, and years from diagnosis
to randomization. Product terms be-
tween randomization assignment and
indicator variables for covariate cat-
egories were included in Cox regres-

Table 1. Baseline Characteristics of WHEL Study Participants by Study Groupa

Characteristics

Age at study entry, mean (SD), y
College graduate
Race/ethnicity

White
African American
Hispanic
Asian American
Mixed/other

Cancer stage at diagnosis

I
II
IIIA

Nodal statusb
Negative
1-3 positive nodes
⬎3 positive nodes

Hormone receptor statusb

ER⫹/PR⫹
ER⫹/PR−
ER−/PR⫹
ER−/PR−

Initial treatment
Mastectomy
Breast-sparing surgery
Radiation
Adjuvant chemotherapy
Ever antiestrogen use

Tumor grade

I (well differentiated)
II (moderately differentiated)
III (poorly differentiated)
Unspecified

Prior bilateral oophorectomy
Time from diagnosis to randomization,

mean (SD), mo

Intervention
(n = 1537)
53.3 (8.9)
853 (55.5)

1306 (85.0)
61 (4.0)
87 (5.7)
46 (3.0)
37 (2.4)

585 (38.1)
876 (57.0)
76 (4.9)

879 (57.2)
436 (28.4)
221 (14.4)

955 (62.1)
197 (12.8)
52 (3.4)
300 (19.5)

812 (52.8)
725 (47.2)
937 (61.0)
1095 (71.2)
1067 (69.4)

239 (15.6)
620 (40.3)
551 (35.9)
127 (8.3)
223 (14.6)
23.6 (12.5)

Comparison
(n = 1551)
53.0 (9.0)
820 (52.9)

1328 (85.6)
57 (3.7)
78 (5.0)
50 (3.2)
38 (2.5)

606 (39.1)
867 (55.9)
78 (5.0)

896 (57.8)
448 (28.9)
207 (13.4)

948 (61.1)
169 (10.9)
77 (5.0)
319 (20.6)

801 (51.6)
750 (48.4)
962 (62.0)
1064 (68.6)
1012 (65.3)

245 (15.8)
620 (40.0)
557 (35.9)
129 (8.3)
177 (11.4)
23.5 (12.5)

132 (8.6)

Baseline eligibility for BRCA testing
Abbreviations: ER, estrogen receptor; PR, progesterone receptor.
a Data are expressed as No. (%) of participants unless otherwise indicated. There were no significant between-group
differences in baseline characteristics based on ␹2 test for categorical variables or t test for continuous variables,
except for ever antiestrogen use (P = .03) and prior bilateral oophorectomy (P = .01).

123 (7.9)

b Numbers do not total 3088 because of missing data.

sion models. Interactions between ran-
domization group and each covariate
were formally tested for significance
with likelihood ratio tests. The results
are presented as hazard ratios and 95%
confidence intervals.

In additional analyses, we exam-
ined possible interactions between
study group and the baseline dietary
factors targeted by the intervention
(vegetable, fruit, fiber, and fat in-
takes) to address whether the effects of
the dietary intervention might vary by
baseline intake level.

Analyses were conducted in the sta-
tistics software package R, version 2.3.1
(R Foundation, Vienna, Austria; http:
//www.r-project.org) or SAS, version 9.1.

RESULTS
Recruitment and Baseline
Characteristics
Study staff screened 7572 potential par-
ticipants and randomized 3107 be-
tween March 1995 and November 30,
2000 (Figure 1). There was no differ-
ence in postrandomization exclusions
by study group (9 vs 10). The final
study sample included 1537 women in
the dietary intervention group and 1551
in the study comparison group.

The study end date was June 1, 2006.
Number and frequency of reported phy-
sician visits did not differ significantly
between groups at any point during the
study. We confirmed vital status on the
study end date (Figure 1) for 95% of
the intervention group and 96% of the
comparison group. Breast cancer sta-
tus was confirmed for 96% of the in-
tervention group and 97% of the com-
parison group.

Randomization achieved highly com-
parable groups (TABLE 1) with regard
to demographics (ie, age, minority sta-
tus, and education), breast cancer char-
acteristics (ie, stage, grade, nodal in-
volvement, hormone receptor status,
time from breast cancer diagnosis to
randomization, and eligibility for
BRCA1/2 testing), and treatment (ie,
surgery and radiation). Slight imbal-
ances were observed between groups in
bilateral oophorectomy, antiestrogen
use, and chemotherapy treatment, all

292 JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 (Reprinted)

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

of which favored an intervention effect;
however, no between-group differ-
ence was observed in the percentage of
women who received at least 1 of these
therapies (intervention, 93.6%; com-
parison, 92.3%; P=.12). Fourteen per-
cent of women self-identified as mi-
nority race/ethnicity, and these were
fairly equally divided among African
Americans, Hispanics, and Asian
Americans.20

Dietary Changes Between Groups
In analyses of dietary change, only par-
ticipants without a study end point at
the time of assessment were included.
A high proportion of women com-
pleted the dietary assessments
(TABLE 2). At baseline, no between-
group differences were observed in in-
takes of vegetables, fruit, or fiber or en-
ergy intake from fat, with both groups
consuming a daily mean of more than
7 servings of vegetables and fruit. No

between-group differences were ob-
served in measured mean body weight
or in energy intake.

In the comparison group, consump-
tion of vegetables, fruit, or fiber changed
only modestly over the 6 years follow-
ing randomization, while relative en-
ergy intake from fat increased 13%, re-
flecting an identified secular trend
( J.P.P., V.A.N., L.N., et al, unpub-
lished data, May 2007). In the inter-
vention group, the dietary pattern
changed substantially and a large
(P ⬍ .001) between-group difference
was achieved and maintained for each
dietary target across the 6 years of the
intervention. From no difference at
baseline, the overall adherence score
was 91% higher in the intervention
group at 6 months and remained 61%
higher than the comparison group at 6
years. Details of changes in dietary tar-
gets are presented elsewhere (J.P.P.,
V.A.N., L.N., et al, unpublished data,

May 2007). Using the more conserva-
tive imputed data approach,27 at 1 year,
the intervention group had increased
average total vegetable and fruit in-
take to 12 servings/d. This change in
total vegetable and fruit intake re-
flected a major increase in vegetable in-
take, averaging 7.8 vegetable serv-
ings/d at 1 year and remaining relatively
high at 6 servings/d at the 4-year
follow-up.

At 4 years, relative differences in
mean intake between study groups were
⫹65% for vegetable servings, ⫹25% for
fruit servings, ⫹30% for fiber, and −13%
for energy intake from fat. All differ-
ences were statistically significant at
P⬍.001. Total plasma carotenoid con-
centration, a biomarker of vegetable and
fruit intake, was 73% higher in the in-
tervention group than the comparison
group at 1 year and 43% higher at 4
years, differences that were statisti-
cally significant (P ⬍ .001). In addi-

Table 2. Dietary Pattern and Body Weight by Groupa

Baseline

6 mo

12 mo

24 mo

36 mo

48 mo

72 mo

Intervention group

Eligible sample, No.
Response rate, %

Comparison group

Eligible sample, No.
Response rate, %

Total vegetable servings/d

Intervention
Comparison

Total fruit servings/d

Intervention
Comparison

Fiber, g/d

Intervention
Comparison

Energy from fat, %

Intervention
Comparison

Adherence scoreb

Intervention
Comparison

Energy intake, kcal/d

Intervention
Comparison
Body weight, kg
Intervention
Comparison

1537
99.9

1551
99.8

3.9 (0.05)
3.8 (0.05)

3.5 (0.05)
3.4 (0.05)

21.1 (0.21)
21.2 (0.20)

28.5 (0.18)
28.7 (0.18)

286 (3)
283 (3)

1719 (10)
1717 (11)

73.5 (0.42)
73.3 (0.43)

738
91.3

765
96.9

8.4 (0.13)
3.9 (0.07)

4.4 (0.08)
3.6 (0.08)

30.9 (0.40)
21.4 (0.30)

21.2 (0.26)
27.8 (0.27)

574 (7)
301 (5)

1619 (14)
1615 (15)

NAc
NAc

1463
88.3

1484
93.0

7.8 (0.09)
3.9 (0.05)

4.2 (0.06)
3.4 (0.05)

29.0 (0.28)
21.0 (0.22)

22.7 (0.20)
28.4 (0.19)

533 (6)
292 (4)

1603 (10)
1605 (11)

73.0 (0.45)
73.8 (0.47)

715
85.5

699
90.6

7.1 (0.13)
3.7 (0.07)

3.9 (0.08)
3.3 (0.08)

27.6 (0.41)
20.5 (0.30)

24.5 (0.29)
29.2 (0.30)

485 (8)
282 (5)

1592 (15)
1606 (15)

74.2 (0.71)
74.0 (0.68)

676
84.8

713
89.5

6.6 (0.13)
3.7 (0.07)

3.8 (0.09)
2.9 (0.07)

26.1 (0.42)
20.0 (0.30)

25.4 (0.32)
30.6 (0.30)

461 (8)
268 (5)

1523 (15)
1601 (16)

73.9 (0.73)
74.9 (0.74)

1355
83.0

1363
88.6

6.4 (0.09)
3.7 (0.05)

3.6 (0.06)
2.8 (0.05)

25.2 (0.29)
19.3 (0.21)

27.1 (0.24)
31.4 (0.22)

435 (6)
262 (3)

1552 (11)
1574 (11)

74.2 (0.51)
74.1 (0.50)

1308
77.9

1313
86.2

5.8 (0.09)
3.6 (0.05)

3.4 (0.07)
2.6 (0.05)

24.2 (0.30)
18.9 (0.24)

28.9 (0.25)
32.4 (0.22)

396 (6)
246 (3)

1538 (11)
1559 (12)

74.1 (0.54)
73.7 (0.53)

a Data are expressed as mean (SE) unless otherwise indicated.
b Adherence score was calculated as 30 points for each vegetable or fruit serving (excluding white potatoes, juice, and iceberg lettuce); 10 points for each ounce of vegetable juice;
5 points for each percentage point of energy from fat below 40% to a maximum of 100 points for 20% energy from fat; and 7.7 points for each gram of fiber per 1000 kcal above
5 g/1000 kcal. Perfect adherence was 600 points.

c Data for body weight are not applicable (NA) because it was not measured at 6 months.

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 293

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

tion, a subsample study identified
changes in plasma triacylglycerol and
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
concentrations that were specific to the
intervention group, supporting self-
reported changes in carbohydrate and
fat intakes.34 Study groups differed by
less than 80 kcal/d in energy intake and
by less than 1 kg in body weight at any
study point.

Breast Cancer Event-Free Survival
During the study, 518 participants had
a breast cancer event (TABLE 3), rep-

Table 3. Study Events

Study Outcomes
Confirmed breast
cancer event

Local
Regional
Distal
New primary

Confirmed deaths
Breast cancer
Other cancer
Heart disease
Other

No. of Events

Intervention Comparison

256

35
10
168
43
155
127
12
2
14

262

28
10
189
35
160
135
15
5
5

resenting 256 participants (16.7%) in
the intervention group and 262 par-
ticipants (16.9%) in the comparison
group. The disease-free survival curves
were virtually identical across groups
(FIGURE 2). The unadjusted hazard ra-
tio is presented in Figure 2. The
hazard ratio after adjustment for anti-
estrogen use, oophorectomy status, and
stratification factors (including tumor
stage, clinic site, and age) at baseline
was 0.96 (95% confidence interval,
0.80-1.14; P=.63). The likelihood ra-
tio test statistics for group interac-
tions with age, body mass index, physi-
cal activity, energy intake, char-
acteristics of the original tumor (in-
cluding hormone receptor status), and
years from diagnosis to study entry were
not significant (TABLE 4). Further-
more, hazard ratios for intervention ef-
fects within covariate strata were not
significant (Table 4).

Overall Mortality
There were 315 deaths reported within
the study period, with 155 (10.1%) in
the intervention group and 160 (10.3%)
in the comparison group (Figure 2).
More than 80% of all deaths were due

to breast cancer (Table 3). The treat-
ment-associated hazard ratio was 0.91
(95% confidence interval, 0.72-1.15;
P=.43) after adjusting for antiestrogen
use, bilateral oophorectomy, and strati-
fication factors. The likelihood ratio test
statistics for the group interactions with
age, body mass index, physical activ-
ity, energy intake, characteristics of the
original tumor (including hormone re-
ceptor status), and years from diagno-
sis to study entry were not statistically
significant, nor were significant effects
of the intervention on mortality ob-
served for any subgroups of women clas-
sified by major covariates (TABLE 5).

Group Effects by Baseline Quartiles
of Dietary Intake
Within each quartile of the targeted di-
etary components, the intervention
group achieved significant change from
baseline (TABLE 6). However, there was
no evidence of a consistent pattern of
an intervention effect for either breast
cancer events or mortality according to
any baseline diet subgroup, and the
findings that are statistically signifi-
cant in 2 of the 40 compared strata are
what one might expect due to chance.

Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier Estimates of Disease-Free Survival and All-Cause Mortality by Diet Group

Disease-Free Survival

Overall Survival

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.83-1.17; P = .87
Adjusted HR, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.80-1.14; P = .63

Intervention
Comparison

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

HR, 0.97; 95% CI, 0.78-1.22; P = .82
Adjusted HR, 0.91; 95% CI, 0.72-1.15; P = .43

Intervention
Comparison

0

1

2

4

3
7
Years Since Randomization

5

6

8

9

10

0

1

2

4

3
7
Years Since Randomization

6

5

8

9

10

No. at risk

Comparison
Intervention

Breast cancer events

Comparison
Intervention

1551
1537

1491
1476

1436
1422

1395
1378

1353
1343

1319
1301

1113
1087

817
811

489
505

271
278

96
95

Comparison
Intervention

1551
1537

1537
1524

1516
1509

1492
1482

1463
1452

1428
1410

1220
1185

894
891

541
561

306
314

105
108

55
56

50
50

36
35

34
26

26
27

30
24

10
18

13
7

5
4

1
9

Deaths

Comparison
Intervention

10
9

18
12

17
22

25
24

26
29

21
25

21
17

12
12

7
3

3
2

No. at risk

CI indicates confidence interval; HR, hazard ratio. Adjusted HRs were adjusted for tumor stage, clinic site, age at randomization, antiestrogen use, and oophorectomy
status.

294 JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 (Reprinted)

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

COMMENT
In this randomized trial of a dietary in-
tervention to achieve a substantial change
to a diet very high in vegetables, fruit, and
fiber and low in fat, the risk of develop-
ing additional breast cancer events and
survival were not altered in women pre-
viously treated for early stage disease. No
significant benefit in recurrence was ob-
served overall among population sub-
groups characterized by demographic
characteristics, baseline diet, or initial tu-
mor types. Although breast cancer mor-
tality rates in the United States declined
during the study period,35 the similarity
in survival patterns between the WHEL
Study groups suggests that continued fol-
low-up would not alter the study re-
sults.

It is unlikely that our results were ma-
terially affected by bias in assessing the
main study end points. Follow-up of par-
ticipants was nearly complete and did not
differ between study groups, and we con-
sidered only reports of recurrence and
new primary tumors that were vali-
dated by medical record review. We ob-
served large and sustained between-
group differences in vegetable and fruit
intake, as assessed by self-report and
plasma carotenoid concentrations, a bio-
marker of vegetable and fruit intake. We
also observed significant differences in
fiber and fat intake. Although weight has
been associated with health outcomes,
we observed less than a 1-kg difference
in average weight between WHEL Study
groups at any time point. While psycho-
social factors have been linked with
health outcomes, we found no between-
group differences for depression, social
support, or quality of life during year 1,
when the intervention was most in-
tense.36 Therefore, we believe that our in-
vestigation provides an adequate test of
whether the study dietary pattern (very
high in vegetables, fruit, and fiber and
low in fat) provided an added benefit over
the dietary pattern of the comparison
group women.

Many WHEL Study participants had
likely changed their dietary pattern
since receiving a diagnosis of breast can-
cer37; 75% were consuming at least 5
servings of vegetables and fruit a day

Table 4. Intervention Effects on Additional Breast Cancer Events by Baseline Clinical and
Demographic Characteristics

No./Total

Intervention Comparison

HR (95% CI)a

P

Valueb

Age at randomization, y

⬍55
ⱖ55

Cancer stage at diagnosis

I
II
IIIA

Hormone receptor statusc

ER⫹/PR⫹
ER⫹/PR−
ER−/PR⫹
ER−/PR−

Time from diagnosis to randomization, y

ⱕ1
⬎1 to 2
⬎2 to 3
⬎3 to 4

Tumor differentiation

I (well differentiated)
II (moderately differentiated)
III (poorly differentiated)
Unspecified

No. of positive nodesc

0
1-3
4-6
ⱖ7

Tumor size, cmc

0 to ⬍2
2 to ⬍3
3 to ⬍4
4 to ⬍5
ⱖ5

Body mass indexd

⬍25
25 to ⬍30
ⱖ30

Physical activity, MET-min/wkc

ⱕ210
211-615
616-1290
⬎1290

Energy intake, kcal/dc

ⱕ1430
1431-1680
1681-1980
⬎1980

167/908
89/629

50/585
178/876
28/76

140/955
37/197
11/52
64/300

59/352
83/488
64/375
50/322

20/239
94/620
121/551
21/127

93/879
83/436
39/116
41/105

82/752
88/421
30/174
21/79
35/109

161/917
101/634

55/606
182/867
25/78

145/948
32/169
18/77
62/319

65/350
90/508
52/372
55/321

22/245
100/620
114/557
26/129

117/896
69/448
31/115
45/92

88/769
86/441
41/160
20/72
27/106

1.05 (0.84-1.30)
0.89 (0.67-1.18)

0.94 (0.64-1.38)
0.97 (0.79-1.19)
1.19 (0.69-2.04)

0.95 (0.76-1.20)
0.97 (0.60-1.56)
0.89 (0.42-1.88)
1.14 (0.80-1.61)

0.88 (0.62-1.26)
0.95 (0.71-1.28)
1.26 (0.87-1.82)
0.90 (0.61-1.32)

0.90 (0.49-1.65)
0.93 (0.70-1.24)
1.09 (0.85-1.41)
0.83 (0.47-1.48)

0.80 (0.61-1.06)
1.25 (0.91-1.72)
1.29 (0.80-2.06)
0.75 (0.49-1.15)

0.94 (0.70-1.28)
1.09 (0.81-1.47)
0.62 (0.39-1.00)
0.90 (0.49-1.67)
1.32 (0.80-2.18)

107/652
81/475
68/410

112/678
68/480
82/393

0.99 (0.76-1.29)
1.22 (0.88-1.69)
0.79 (0.57-1.09)

68/397
62/368
65/375
49/351

63/377
59/384
64/390
70/383

66/350
71/383
54/374
60/387

73/396
64/386
54/379
70/386

0.90 (0.64-1.27)
0.91 (0.64-1.27)
1.22 (0.85-1.74)
0.88 (0.60-1.28)

0.89 (0.64-1.25)
0.90 (0.63-1.28)
1.16 (0.81-1.66)
1.04 (0.75-1.45)

.35

.74

.85

.50

.75

.07

.22

.17

.56

.69

PR, progesterone receptor.

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; ER, estrogen receptor; HR, hazard ratio; MET, metabolic equivalent task;
a Hazard ratios of group effect were derived from Cox model stratified by covariate categories.
b P values based on likelihood ratio test for group ⫻ covariate interaction.
c Numbers do not total 3088 because of missing data.
d Calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared.

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 295

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

at randomization, an intake that is con-
siderably higher than that observed in
other populations of breast cancer sur-

vivors.38,39 However, we observed little
evidence of recurrence benefit in the
quartile of the intervention group that

Table 5. Intervention Effects on All-Cause Mortality by Baseline Demographic and Clinical
Characteristics

No./Total

Intervention Comparison

HR (95% CI)a

P

Valueb

Age at randomization, y

⬍55
ⱖ55

Cancer stage at diagnosis

I
II
IIIA

Hormone receptor statusc

ER⫹/PR⫹
ER⫹/PR−
ER−/PR⫹
ER−/PR−

Time from diagnosis to randomization, y

ⱕ1
⬎1 to 2
⬎2 to 3
⬎3 to 4

Tumor differentiation

I (well differentiated)
II (moderately differentiated)
III (poorly differentiated)
Unspecified

No. of positive nodesc

0
1-3
4-6
ⱖ7

Tumor size, cmc

0 to ⬍2
2 to ⬍3
3 to ⬍4
4 to ⬍5
ⱖ5

Body mass indexd

⬍25
25 to ⬍30
ⱖ30

Physical activity, MET-min/wkc

ⱕ210
211-615
616-1290
⬎1290

Energy intake, kcal/dc

ⱕ1430
1431-1680
1681-1980
⬎1980

84/908
71/629

33/585
102/876
20/76

79/955
25/197
7/52
44/300

46/352
51/488
34/375
24/322

13/239
58/620
75/551
9/127

58/879
48/436
21/116
28/105

42/752
59/421
17/174
13/79
23/109

57/652
48/475
50/410

43/397
45/368
36/375
25/351

44/377
32/384
34/390
45/383

85/917
75/634

0.99 (0.74-1.34)
0.95 (0.69-1.32)

32/606
107/867
21/78

84/948
20/169
10/77
42/319

47/350
58/508
28/372
27/321

7/245
64/620
74/557
15/129

67/896
39/448
19/115
35/92

51/769
50/441
28/160
12/72
19/106

61/678
44/480
55/393

47/350
45/383
35/374
27/387

48/396
40/386
31/379
40/386

1.07 (0.66-1.73)
0.94 (0.71-1.23)
0.96 (0.52-1.77)

0.92 (0.68-1.26)
1.03 (0.57-1.85)
1.08 (0.41-2.83)
1.13 (0.74-1.73)

0.97 (0.64-1.45)
0.90 (0.62-1.32)
1.28 (0.77-2.11)
0.86 (0.50-1.49)

1.80 (0.72-4.52)
0.90 (0.63-1.28)
1.04 (0.75-1.43)
0.62 (0.27-1.42)

0.89 (0.62-1.26)
1.27 (0.83-1.94)
1.09 (0.59-2.03)
0.64 (0.39-1.05)

0.83 (0.55-1.26)
1.27 (0.87-1.85)
0.53 (0.29-0.96)
0.94 (0.43-2.06)
1.21 (0.66-2.22)

0.97 (0.67-1.38)
1.11 (0.74-1.67)
0.86 (0.59-1.27)

0.80 (0.53-1.22)
1.04 (0.69-1.58)
1.02 (0.64-1.63)
1.01 (0.58-1.73)

0.95 (0.63-1.43)
0.77 (0.49-1.23)
1.08 (0.66-1.75)
1.17 (0.77-1.79)

.85

.90

.88

.72

.32

.20

.13

.70

.81

.62

PR, progesterone receptor.

Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; ER, estrogen receptor; HR, hazard ratio; MET, metabolic equivalent task;
a Hazard ratios of group effect were derived from Cox model stratified by covariate categories.
b P values based on likelihood ratio test for group ⫻ covariate interaction.
c Numbers do not total 3088 because of missing data.
d Calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared.

was consuming less than 5 daily serv-
ings of vegetables and fruit at base-
line, despite a major change in dietary
pattern that was specific to the inter-
vention group. Previously, in longitu-
dinal analyses of the comparison group
only, we observed a possible thresh-
old effect on recurrence for low levels
of baseline plasma carotenoid concen-
tration13 and also that a baseline com-
bination of 5 fruits and vegetables a day
and physical activity equivalent to walk-
ing at a moderate pace for 30 minutes,
6 d/wk, was associated with lower mor-
tality.14 However, in this analysis of data
from the randomized trial, a major in-
crease over the 5-a-day dietary pattern
was not associated with reduced breast
cancer events or mortality.

We suggest caution in applying our
findings to groups of women other than
those represented in our study, which
was confined to women who had al-
ready completed initial therapy for
breast cancer and excluded women with
diagnoses after age 70 years and those
with stage 1 tumors smaller than 1 cm.
Also, only 14% of our study popula-
tion was self-identified as from Afri-
can American, Hispanic, and Asian
American racial/ethnic groups.

Our finding that reducing dietary fat
intake did not benefit breast cancer out-
comes appears at odds with the in-
terim analyses from the Women’s In-
tervention Nutrition Study (WINS),
which concluded that reducing di-
etary fat intake was marginally associ-
ated with longer relapse-free survival
of breast cancer patients, an effect most
noted in the subgroup with estrogen-
negative tumors. However, differen-
tial follow-up between intervention and
comparison groups may have influ-
enced the WINS finding.40 Further-
more, the reduced body weight ob-
served only in the intervention group
might partially account for the im-
proved relapse-free survival in WINS.41
In addition, although WINS reported
an 8% to 9% between-group differ-
ence in energy intake from fat main-
tained through 5 years, they reported
a higher rate of missing dietary intake
data in the intervention group. At the

296 JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 (Reprinted)

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

3-year point, data were available for
67% of the intervention group vs 74%
of the comparison group. At 5 years,
data were available for 39% of the in-
tervention group and 44% of the com-
parison group. If even moderate pro-
portions of nonresponders increased
their fat intake, the between-group
effect could well be less than the abso-
lute 4% difference that we observed. Fi-
nally, it is important to note that the
women enrolled in WINS differed from
those in the WHEL trial regarding prog-
nosis following the original diagnosis,
age, and treatment regimen.

Although the WHEL Study’s inter-
vention diet focused mainly on increas-
ing vegetable, fruit, and fiber intake,
there was a significant between-group
difference in fat intake. However, this
difference may not have been sufficient
to test the dietary fat hypothesis ad-
equately. Unlike the changes observed
for intakes of vegetables, fruit and fi-
ber, the smallest dietary fat change was
made by participants in the quartile that
was furthest from the study target at
baseline. Nonetheless, our analyses did
not suggest an effect across quartiles of
fat intake at baseline, nor did our re-
sults indicate an intervention effect in
subgroups defined by hormone recep-
tor status, as was seen in WINS.

The absence of an observed effect on
breast cancer events or all-cause mor-
tality over a 7.3-year follow-up period
in this study does not rule out the pos-
sibility of improved longer-term sur-
vivorship within this cohort. We did not
explore the possibility that increased ex-
ercise and weight loss might benefit
breast cancer survivors. Finally, our
study did not address whether consum-
ing the high–vegetable/fruit/fiber and
low-fat diet of our study intervention
early in life would alter risk of pri-
mary breast cancer.

In conclusion, during a mean 7.3-year
follow-up, we found no evidence that
adoption of a dietary pattern very high
in vegetables, fruit, and fiber and low in
fat vs a 5-a-day fruit and vegetable diet
preventsbreastcancerrecurrenceordeath
among women with previously treated
early stage breast cancer.

Table 6. Intervention Effects on Additional Breast Cancer Events and All-Cause Mortality by
Baseline Quartiles of Dietary Intake

Variables by Baseline Quartilea
Vegetables and fruit, servings/d

ⱕ4.94
4.95-6.74
6.75-8.92
⬎8.92

Vegetables, servings/d

ⱕ2.55
2.56-3.54
3.55-4.80
⬎4.80

Fruit, servings/d

ⱕ1.76
1.77-2.93
2.94-4.38
⬎4.38
Fiber, g/d
ⱕ15.6
15.7-19.9
20.0-25.2
⬎25.2

No. of Participants

at Baseline

(Difference, %)b

772 (⫹60)
771 (⫹52)
768 (⫹53)
770 (⫹54)

772 (⫹82)
770 (⫹75)
769 (⫹74)
770 (⫹68)

771 (⫹40)
771 (⫹21)
772 (⫹27)
767 (⫹27)

771 (⫹40)
772 (⫹33)
769 (⫹28)
769 (⫹28)

Breast Cancer

Eventsc

Deathsc

No. HR (95% CI)d No. HR (95% CI)d

152 0.97 (0.71-1.34)
122 1.23 (0.86-1.75)
144 0.93 (0.67-1.30)
99 0.83 (0.56-1.24)

88 0.75 (0.49-1.14)
76 1.25 (0.80-1.97)
83 1.28 (0.83-1.98)
67 0.76 (0.47-1.23)

162 1.13 (0.83-1.54) 101 1.05 (0.71-1.55)
67 0.85 (0.52-1.38)
127 0.98 (0.70-1.39)
76 0.85 (0.54-1.33)
118 0.85 (0.59-1.22)
110 0.97 (0.67-1.40)
70 1.19 (0.74-1.90)

139 1.02 (0.73-1.42)
129 1.02 (0.72-1.44)
126 1.11 (0.78-1.58)
123 0.81 (0.57-1.16)

85 0.75 (0.49-1.15)
77 1.02 (0.65-1.60)
77 1.60 (1.02-2.51)
75 0.76 (0.48-1.19)

135 0.97 (0.70-1.36)
132 1.07 (0.76-1.51)
131 1.07 (0.76-1.51)
119 0.83 (0.58-1.20)

83 0.69 (0.45-1.07)
83 1.12 (0.72-1.72)
87 1.36 (0.89-2.08)
61 0.80 (0.48-1.34)

Fat, % of energy per d

ⱕ23.8
23.9-28.6
28.7-33.4
⬎33.4

782 (−17)
768 (−13)
766 (−15)
765 (−10)
Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; HR, hazard ratio.
a Seven participants (4 in comparison group and 3 in intervention group) were missing baseline dietary data.
b Percentage relative difference in mean dietary intake ([intervention − control]/control) between intervention and com-
c Likelihood ratio test for group ⫻ diet quartile interactions was not significant at P ⬍ .05 level for any diet component
d Hazard ratios were derived from Cox model stratified by quartiles of dietary intake.

106 0.72 (0.49-1.06)
149 1.27 (0.92-1.76)
122 0.86 (0.60-1.23)
140 1.13 (0.81-1.58)

59 0.73 (0.44-1.22)
91 1.61 (1.06-2.45)
78 0.73 (0.46-1.14)
86 0.98 (0.64-1.49)

parison groups at 4 years.

(except energy from fat and mortality; P = .04).

Author Affiliations: Moores UCSD Cancer Center, Uni-
versity of California, San Diego, La Jolla (Drs Pierce,
Natarajan, Parker, Rock, Al-Delaimy, Bardwell, Hol-
lenbach, Madlensky, and Wasserman and Mss Flatt,
Kealey, Faerber, and Newman); Kaiser Permanente
Northern California, Division of Research, Oakland (Dr
Caan); Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Se-
attle, Washington (Dr Greenberg); Stanford Compre-
hensive Cancer Center (Dr Carlson) and Stanford Pre-
vention Research Center (Dr Stefanick), Stanford
University, Stanford, California; Department of Fam-
ily and Preventive Medicine, Division of Biostatistics,
University of California, San Diego (Ms Emond); De-
partment of Public Health Sciences, University of Cali-
fornia, Davis (Dr Gold); M. D. Anderson Cancer Cen-
ter, University of Texas, Houston (Drs Hajek and Jones);
Center for Health Research, Portland, Oregon (Dr
Karanja); Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY
(Dr Marshall); and Department of Family and Com-
munity Medicine (Dr Ritenbaugh) and Arizona Can-
cer Center, Department of Nutritional Sciences (Dr
Thomson), University of Arizona, Tucson.
Author Contributions: Dr Pierce had full access to all
of the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data
analysis.
Study concept and design: Pierce, Natarajan, Parker,
Greenberg, Carlson, Faerber, Hajek, Jones, Ritenbaugh,
Wasserman.

Acquisition of data: Caan, Parker, Kealey, Carlson,
Gold, Hollenbach, Karanja, Marshall, Newman,
Ritenbaugh, Thomson, Stefanick.
Analysis and interpretation of data: Pierce, Natarajan,
Greenberg, Flatt, Rock, Al-Delaimy, Bardwell, Emond,
Faerber, Gold, Madlensky, Stefanick.
Drafting of the manuscript: Pierce, Natarajan,
Greenberg, Flatt.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important in-
tellectual content: Pierce, Natarajan, Caan, Parker,
Greenberg, Flatt, Rock, Kealey, Al-Delaimy, Bardwell,
Carlson, Emond, Faerber, Gold, Hajek, Hollenbach,
Jones, Karanja, Madlensky, Marshall, Newman,
Ritenbaugh, Thomson, Wasserman, Stefanick.
Statistical analysis: Natarajan, Flatt, Emond, Marshall.
Obtained funding: Pierce, Caan, Greenberg, Bardwell,
Gold, Hollenbach, Jones, Marshall, Newman,
Ritenbaugh, Wasserman, Stefanick.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Flatt,
Rock, Kealey, Al-Delaimy, Carlson, Faerber, Hajek,
Karanja, Madlensky, Newman.
Study supervision: Pierce, Natarajan, Caan, Parker,
Gold, Hollenbach, Jones, Karanja, Newman, Thomson,
Stefanick.
Financial Disclosures: None reported.
WHEL Study Investigators: Research Team by Clini-
cal Site: WHEL Study Coordinating Center: Univer-
sity of California, San Diego (UCSD), Cancer Preven-
tion and Control Program, Moores UCSD Cancer

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

(Reprinted) JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 297

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018HIGH–VEGETABLE/FRUIT/FIBER, LOW-FAT DIET AND BREAST CANCER PROGNOSIS

Center, San Diego ( John P. Pierce, PhD, Susan Faer-
ber, BA, Barbara A. Parker, MD, Loki Natarajan, PhD,
Cheryl L. Rock, PhD, RD, Vicky A. Newman, MS, RD,
Shirley W. Flatt, MS, Sheila Kealey, MPH, Linda
Wasserman, MD, PhD, Wayne A. Bardwell, PhD, Lisa
Madlensky, PhD); WHEL Study Dietary Counselors:
Sheila K. Fisher, Joyce Bertaux, Leslie Barbier, Sharon
Bonner, Prudy Galagan, Carrie Gonzales, Kaylene
Grove, Pam Herskovitz, Susie Newmiller, Lita Sim-
mons, Susan Wancewicz; WHEL Study Dietary As-
sessors: Andrea Jackson, Lita Simmons, Denice Mu-
rillo, Sophie Levy, Nichole Brumley; Laboratory
Analysis: Dennis Heath, MS, Mila Pruitt; Clinical Sites:
Center for Health Research–Portland, Portland, Or-
egon (Njeri Karanja, PhD, Mark U. Rarick, MD, Lucy
Fulton, DTR, RD); Kaiser Permanente Northern Cali-
fornia, Oakland (Bette J. Caan, DrPH, Lou Fehren-
bacher, MD, Sarah Josef, RD); Stanford Prevention Re-
search Center, Stanford University, Stanford, California
(Marcia L. Stefanick, PhD, Robert Carlson, MD,
Charlene Kranz, RD, Gwen D’Antoni, RD, Natalie
Ledesma, MS, RD, Monique Schloetter, MS, RD); Uni-
versity of Arizona, Tucson and Phoenix (Cynthia Thom-
son, PhD, RD, James Warneke, MD, Cheryl Riten-
baugh, PhD, MPH, Tina Green, MS, RD, Emily Nardi,
MPH, RD); University of California, Davis (Ellen B. Gold,
PhD, Sidney Scudder, MD, Stephanie Burns, Linda
Bresnick); University of California, San Diego, Moores
UCSD Cancer Center, San Diego (Kathryn A. Hollen-
bach, PhD, Vicky Jones, MD, Michelle McKinney, Di-
ana Wiggins, RD); University of Texas M. D. Ander-
son Cancer Center, Houston (Lovell A. Jones, PhD,
Richard Hajek, PhD, Richard Theriault, DO, Taylor Tran,
RD, LD).
Funding/Support: The WHEL Study was initiated with
the support of the Walton Family Foundation and con-
tinued with funding from National Cancer Institute
grant CA 69375. Some of the data were collected from
general clinical research centers (National Institutes of
Health grants M01-RR00070, M01-RR00079, and
M01-RR00827).
Role of the Sponsor: The funding sponsors had no role
in the design, protocol development, or conduct of
the trial or in data collection, data analysis, or manu-
script preparation.
Additional Contributions: We thank the WHEL Study’s
data and safety monitoring committee (Brian Hender-
son, MD, Ross Prentice, PhD, Marion Nestle, MPH,
PhD, and Charles Loprinzi, MD) and Sharon Ross, PhD
(National Cancer Institute project officer) for their as-
sistance with review of the article. We also acknowl-
edge Kaylene Grove, BS, BA, Christine Hayes, MA, and
Hollie Ward, BA, Cancer Prevention and Control Pro-
gram, UCSD, for their administrative support and as-
sistance with manuscript preparation. Finally, we are
especially grateful to our dietary counseling team and
WHEL Study participants for their sustained commit-
ment and dedication to this long-term trial.

REFERENCES

1. Steinmetz KA, Potter JD. Vegetables, fruit, and can-
cer, II: mechanisms. Cancer Causes Control. 1991;
2(6):427-442.
2. World Cancer Research Fund. Food, Nutrition and
the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective. Wash-
ington, DC: World Cancer Research Fund, American
Institute for Cancer Research; 1997.
3. Ingram D. Diet and subsequent survival in women
with breast cancer. Br J Cancer. 1994;69(3):592-595.
4. Jain M, Miller AB, To T. Premorbid diet and the prog-
nosis of women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst.
1994;86(18):1390-1397.

5. Holm LE, Nordevang E, Hjalmar ML, Lidbrink E,
Callmer E, Nilsson B. Treatment failure and dietary hab-
its in women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst.
1993;85(1):32-36.
6. Rohan TE, Hiller JE, McMichael AJ. Dietary factors
and survival from breast cancer. Nutr Cancer.
1993;20(2):167-177.
7. Zhang S, Folsom AR, Sellers TA, Kushi LH, Potter
JD. Better breast cancer survival for postmenopausal
women who are less overweight and eat less fat: the
Iowa Women’s Health Study. Cancer. 1995;76(2):275-
283.
8. Nomura AM, Marchand LL, Kolonel LN, Hankin
JH. The effect of dietary fat on breast cancer survival
among Caucasian and Japanese women in Hawaii.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1991;18(suppl 1):S135-
S141.
9. Gregorio DI, Emrich LJ, Graham S, Marshall JR, Ne-
moto T. Dietary fat consumption and survival among
women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1985;
75(1):37-41.
10. Rock CL, Demark-Wahnefried W. Nutrition and
survival after the diagnosis of breast cancer: a review
of the evidence. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20(15):3302-3316.
11. Mai V, Kant AK, Flood A, Lacey JV Jr, Schairer
C, Schatzkin A. Diet quality and subsequent cancer
incidence and mortality in a prospective cohort of
women. Int J Epidemiol. 2005;34(1):54-60.
12. Kroenke CH, Fung TT, Hu FB, Holmes MD. Di-
etary patterns and survival after breast cancer diagnosis.
J Clin Oncol. 2005;23(36):9295-9303.
13. Rock CL, Flatt SW, Natarajan L, et al. Plasma
carotenoids and recurrence-free survival in women with
a history of breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23
(27):6631-6638.
14. Pierce JP, Stefanick ML, Flatt SW, et al. Greater
survival after breast cancer in physically active women
with high vegetable-fruit intake regardless of obesity.
J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(17):2345-2351.
15. McEligot AJ, Largent J, Ziogas A, Peel D, Anton-
Culver H. Dietary fat, fiber, vegetable, and micronu-
trients are associated with overall survival in post-
menopausal women diagnosed with breast cancer. Nutr
Cancer. 2006;55(2):132-140.
16. Davies AA, Davey Smith G, Harbord R, et al. Nu-
tritional interventions and outcome in patients with
cancer or preinvasive lesions: systematic review. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2006;98(14):961-973.
17. Harashima E, Nakagawa Y, Urata G, Tsuji K, Shi-
rataka M, Matsumura Y. Time-lag estimate between
dietary intake and breast cancer mortality in Japan.
Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2007;16(1):193-198.
18. Chlebowski RT, Blackburn GL, Thomson CA, et al.
Dietary fat reduction and breast cancer outcome: interim
efficacy results from the Women’s Intervention Nutrition
Study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98(24):1767-1776.
19. Clark C. Study will put folklore on diet to test. San
Diego Union-Tribune. March 11, 1998:A1, A17.
20. Pierce JP, Faerber S, Wright FA, et al. A random-
ized trial of the effect of a plant-based dietary pat-
tern on additional breast cancer events and survival:
the Women’s Healthy Eating and Living (WHEL) Study.
Control Clin Trials. 2002;23(6):728-756.
21. Pierce JP, Newman VA, Flatt SW, et al. Tele-
phone counseling intervention increases intakes of mi-
cronutrient- and phytochemical-rich vegetables, fruit
and fiber in breast cancer survivors. J Nutr. 2004;
134(2):452-458.
22. National Cancer Institute. Action Guide for Healthy
Eating. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 1995.
23. National Cancer Institute. Eat 5 Fruits and Veg-
etables a Day. Washington, DC: National Cancer In-
stitute; 1995.
24. Lachin JM, Foulkes MA. Evaluation of sample size

and power for analyses of survival with allowance for
nonuniform patient entry, losses to follow-up, non-
compliance, and stratification. Biometrics. 1986;
42(3):507-519.
25. Bandura A. Social Foundations of Thought and
Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall; 1986.
26. US Department of Agriculture/US Department of
Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for
Americans: Home Health and Garden Bulletin No. 232.
Washington, DC: US Dept of Health and Human Ser-
vices; 1995.
27. Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical Analysis With Miss-
ing Data. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons; 1987.
28. Myriad Genetic Laboratories. BRCA risk calcula-
tor and mutation prevalence tables. http://www
.myriadtests.com/provider/brca-mutation-prevalence
.htm. Accessed June 4, 2007.
29. Women’s Health Initiative. WHI Personal Habits
Questionnaire. http://www.whiscience.org/data/forms
/F34v2.pdf. Accessed June 4, 2007.
30. Johnson-Kozlow M, Rock CL, Gilpin EA, Hollen-
bach KA, Pierce JP. Validation of the WHI Brief Physi-
cal Activity Questionnaire among women diagnosed
with breast cancer. Am J Health Behav. 2007;31(2):
193-202.
31. Hong S, Bardwell WA, Natarajan L, et al. Corre-
lates of physical activity level in breast cancer survi-
vors participating in the Women’s Healthy Eating and
Living (WHEL) Study. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007;
101(2):225-232.
32. Women’s Health Initiative. WHI Thoughts and
Feelings Questionnaire. http://www.whiscience.org
/data/dd_byset/f37_dd.pdf. Accessed June 4, 2007.
33. Therneau TM, Grambsch PM. Modeling Sur-
vival Data: Extending the Cox Model, Statistics for
Biology and Health. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag;
2000.
34. Rock CL, Flatt SW, Thomson CA, et al. Plasma
triacylglycerol and HDL cholesterol concentrations con-
firm self-reported changes in carbohydrate and fat in-
takes in women in a diet intervention trial. J Nutr. 2004;
134(2):342-347.
35. Jatoi I, Chen BE, Anderson WF, Rosenberg PS.
Breast cancer mortality trends in the United States ac-
cording to estrogen receptor status and age at
diagnosis. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(13):1683-1690.
36. Bardwell W, Major J, Pierce JP. Quality of life
change in breast cancer survivors participating in the
Women’s Healthy Eating and Living (WHEL) Study.
Ann Behav Med. 2003;25(suppl):52.
37. Thomson CA, Flatt SW, Rock CL, Ritenbaugh C,
Newman V, Pierce JP. Increased fruit, vegetable and
fiber intake and lower fat intake reported among
women previously treated for invasive breast cancer.
J Am Diet Assoc. 2002;102(6):801-808.
38. Caan B, Sternfeld B, Gunderson E, Coates A, Que-
senberry C, Slattery ML. Life After Cancer Epidemi-
ology (LACE) study: a cohort of early stage breast can-
cer survivors (United States). Cancer Causes Control.
2005;16(5):545-556.
39. Wayne SJ, Lopez ST, Butler LM, Baumgartner KB,
Baumgartner RN, Ballard-Barbash R. Changes in di-
etary intake after diagnosis of breast cancer. J Am Diet
Assoc. 2004;104(10):1561-1568.
40. Pierce JP, Natarajan L, Marshall J, Messer K. Di-
etary fat reduction and breast cancer outcome: in-
terim efficacy results from the Women’s Intervention
Nutrition Study [letter]. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;
99(11):900.
41. Thie´ baut AC, Schatzkin A, Ballard-Barbash R, Kip-
nis V. Dietary fat and breast cancer: contributions from
a survival trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98(24):1753-
1755.

298 JAMA, July 18, 2007—Vol 298, No. 3 (Reprinted)

©2007 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Downloaded From:  by a University of Ottawa User  on 06/11/2018Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

MiniReview

Cancer
Prevention
Research

Heme Iron from Meat and Risk of Colorectal Cancer:
A Meta-analysis and a Review of the Mechanisms Involved

Nadia M. Bastide, Fabrice H.F. Pierre, and Denis E. Corpet

Abstract

Red meat and processed meat intake is associated with a risk of colorectal cancer, a major cause of
death in affluent countries. Epidemiological and experimental evidence supports the hypothesis that
heme iron present in meat promotes colorectal cancer. This meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies
of colon cancer reporting heme intake included 566,607 individuals and 4,734 cases of colon cancer.
The relative risk of colon cancer was 1.18 (95% CI: 1.06–1.32) for subjects in the highest category of
heme iron intake compared with those in the lowest category. Epidemiological data thus show a
suggestive association between dietary heme and risk of colon cancer. The analysis of experimental
studies in rats with chemically-induced colon cancer showed that dietary hemoglobin and red meat
consistently promote aberrant crypt foci, a putative precancer lesion. The mechanism is not known, but
heme iron has a catalytic effect on (i) the endogenous formation of carcinogenic N-nitroso compounds
and (ii) the formation of cytotoxic and genotoxic aldehydes by lipoperoxidation. A review of
evidence supporting these hypotheses suggests that both pathways are involved in heme iron toxicity.
Cancer Prev Res; 4(2); 177–84. Ó2011 AACR.

Introduction

Cancer of the colon and rectum, taken together, are the
third most common type of cancer worldwide (1). In most
publications, colon and rectal cancer are studied together
and the term colorectal cancer (CRC) is used, which we also
use here, except when the publications refer specifically to
colon or rectal cancer. CRC is the second most common
cause of cancer death in affluent countries. Dietary mod-
ifications might reduce this cancer burden by up to 70%
(2). Three recent meta-analyses showed that total meat
intake is not related to risk but that intake of red or
processed meat is associated with a modest, but significant
risk of CRC (3–5). Processed meat intake appears to be
more closely linked with the risk of CRC than fresh red
meat intake. In its 2007 report, the World Cancer Research
Fund panel recommended that one should limit intake of
red meat and avoid processed meat (1).

Several mechanisms may explain the relationship
between the risk of CRC and the intake of red or pro-

Authors' Affiliation: Universite de Toulouse, INRA TOXALIM (Research
Centre in Food Toxicology), INP ENVT, Toulouse, France

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Preven-
tion Research Online (http://cancerprevres.aacrjournals.org/)

Corresponding Author: Fabrice H.F. Pierre, INRA; TOXALIM (Research
Centre in Food Toxicology); Toulouse, France / Universite de Toulouse;
INP; ENVT; 23 ch. Capelles, 31076 Toulouse, France Phone: 0561193289;
Fax: 0561491263; E-mail: f.pierre@envt.fr

doi: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113
Ó2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

cessed meat. First, meat cooked at high temperature
contains mutagenic heterocyclic amines. But heterocyclic
amines might not be major players in CRC risk, as: (i)
consumption of chicken is a major contributor to intake
of heterocyclic amines, but is not associated with the risk
(6); and (ii) doses of heterocyclic amines that induce
cancer in animals are 1,000 to 100,000 times higher than
the dose ingested by humans (7). A second hypothesis
suggests that the high saturated fat content of red and
processed meat increases the risk of CRC. But several
including a recent meta-analysis, showed no
studies,
effect of
saturated fat on colorectal carcinogenesis
(8–11). A third hypothesis concerns the carcinogenic
N-nitroso compounds (NOC), which can be formed in
the gastrointestinal
tract by N-nitrosation of peptide
derived amines or amides. The role of NOC in human
cancer is discussed in the following text. Other more
unlikely hypotheses involve the high protein, cholesterol,
and salt content of red or processed meat. For a review of
all these mechanisms, see ref. 12.

Sesink and colleagues suggested that heme iron, in the
form of hemin [chloroprotoporphyrin IX iron(III)] a ferric
form of heme, may explain the link between the risk of
colon cancer and red meat intake, and the lack of a link
with white meat intake (13). Epidemiological and experi-
mental evidence support heme toxicity. Heme consists of
an iron atom present at the center of a large heterocyclic
organic ring called a porphyrin (Fig. 1). Heme is included
in so-called hemoprotein, that is, hemoglobin, myoglobin
(both involved in the oxygen supply), and in cytochromes
(which catalyze electron transfer reactions). Red meat

www.aacrjournals.org

177

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

Bastide et al.

Figure 1. Structure of molecules cited in the review.

(such as beef, veal, lamb, mutton, pork, and offal) owes it
dark red color to the presence of a high concentration of
myoglobin, and the heme content of red meat is 10-fold
higher than that of white meat (such as chicken; ref. 14). In
processed red meat, heme iron is nitrosylated, because
curing salt contains nitrate or nitrite (Fig. 1; ref. 12).

The aims of the present mini-review were: (i) to conduct
a meta-analysis of epidemiological cohort studies on heme
intake and the risk of colon cancer; (ii) to review experi-
mental evidence supporting the aforementioned heme
hypothesis; and (iii) to understand the mechanism of
action of heme in carcinogenesis.

Heme iron intake and risk of colon cancer:
a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies

the magnitude of

The objective of this part of the review was to assess,
through meta-analysis,
the relation
between heme iron intake and colon cancer. As most
studies do not report data on rectal cancer, we decided
to limit our analysis to colon cancer. The methodological
procedure is described in the Supplementary Material to
this article.

The characteristics of the 5 prospective cohort studies
included in the meta-analysis are summarized in Supple-
mentary Data (Table S1). This meta-analysis included
data on 566,607 individuals and 4,734 cases of colon
cancer. Although 1 cohort study found no association
between heme and cancer (15), 3 found that a high intake
of heme iron was linked with a higher risk of colon cancer
(16–18), and 1 found a positive, but not significant,
association between heme iron and colon cancer (19;
Fig. 2). In the Lee and colleagues study, the relative risk
(RR) for both proximal and distal colon was 1.53 (95%
CI: 0.99–2.38). In the Balder and colleagues study, the
association was positive in the 2 genders combined (RR ¼
1.35, 95% CI: 1.03–1.77; ref. 17). The summary RR of
colon cancer in all 5 studies was 1.18 (95% CI: 1.06–
1.32) for subjects in the highest category of heme iron
intake compared with those in the lowest category
(Fig. 2). This meta-analysis showed a consistent associa-
tion between high intake of heme iron and increased risk
of colon cancer.

Two studies out of 5 considered calcium in the adjust-
ments for the RR (16–18), and showed the strongest

178

Cancer Prev Res; 4(2) February 2011

Cancer Prevention Research

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

Heme Iron and Colorectal Cancer

In conclusion, this meta-analysis showed a significant
and consistent but modest increase in the risk of colon
cancer associated with high heme iron intake. This study
should be pursued by future prospective cohort studies, but
this epidemiological result is in line with experimental
in vivo results detailed in the following text.

Experimental evidence of colorectal cancer promotion
by heme iron

Sawa and colleagues showed that dietary hemoglobin
produces lipid peroxyl radicals and increases the inci-
dence of nitrosomethylurea-induced colon cancer in rats
fed polyunsaturated fat (24). Sesink and colleagues
studied the effect of hemin-supplemented diet in non-
initiated rats. Dietary hemin increases fat peroxidation
and cytotoxic activity of fecal water, and epithelial pro-
liferation by 70% (13). In hemin, the iron atom is
stabilized by a freely exchangeable chloride. Pierre
and colleagues also showed that hemin and hemoglobin
increase the number of azoxymethane-induced aberrant
crypt foci, which are putative preneoplastic lesions, in
the colon of rats (21). In contrast with hemin, dietary
hemoglobin does not increase the cytotoxicity of fecal
water, and it is less potent than hemin in promoting
colon carcinogenesis. Hemoglobin may be a suitable
substitute for myoglobin in nutritional experiments
with animal model, and a model agent for studies on
the cytotoxicity of red meat (21).

Pierre and colleagues also fed 3 types of meat with
different heme content (chicken, beef, and blood sausage)
to rats treated with azoxymethane and fed a low-calcium
diet (25). This study was the first to show that dietary meat
can promote colon carcinogenesis, and that the effect
depends on the heme concentration. The results of this
study of meat contrast with those of several earlier studies,
where red-meat based high-calcium diets failed to promote
colon carcinogenesis, indicating probable protection by
calcium (26). Subsequently, Pierre and colleagues tested
the hypothesis, suggested by epidemiology, that nitrosyl
heme in processed meat was more toxic than native heme
in fresh meat (27). Cured meat can indeed promote colon
carcinogenesis in rats (27). Dietary hemin, but not hemo-
globin, could be used as a model agent to mimic the effects
of processed meat in rats (27). In a recent study, Pierre and
colleagues demonstrated that the nitrosylation of heme
was a key event in the promoting effect of processed meat in
rats (28).

Analysis of the results of experimental studies of rats with
chemically-induced colon cancer (21, 22, 25, 29), showed
that the global standardized effect size for number of
aberrant crypt foci per colon was 1.73 (95% CI: 1.33–
2.14) in rats given dietary heme iron in hemoglobin or beef
meat, compared with control rats. The logistic regression
approach showed a significant correlation between the
number of aberrant crypts per colon and the concentration
of heme in the diet (P ¼ 0.02; see Methods and Figure in
Supplementary Data). This experimental evidence that
heme iron promotes carcinogenesis in rats is consistent

Figure 2. Relative risks of colon cancer in prospective cohort studies,
comparing the highest with the lowest category of heme iron
consumption. Studies are ordered by year of publication. Squares
represent study-specific RR and the size of squares is proportional to the
statistical weight that each contributed to the summary estimate of relative
risk (percentage weight of each study: Lee et al., 2004, proximal: 6.6%;
Lee et al., 2004, distal: 4.6%; Larsson et al., 2005: 18%; Balder et al., 2006,
women: 11.7%; Balder et al., 2006, men: 12.86%; Kabat et al., 2007,
14.2%; Cross et al., 2010: 32%). Horizontal lines represent 95% CI. The
diamond represents the summary estimate of the relative risk of all studies
included in the meta-analysis.

association between heme iron and colon cancer. This
makes sense, as calcium inhibits heme-induced cytotoxi-
city, colonic epithelial hyperproliferation, and promotion
of chemically induced carcinogenesis in animal models
(20–22).

Two studies we excluded from the meta-analysis found
similar results. An ecological study found a direct correla-
tion between the dietary iron index and colon and rectal
cancer (23). Ferrucci and colleagues observed a positive,
but not significant, association between heme iron in diet
and colorectal adenoma.

The present meta-analysis is the first to examine the
relation between heme iron and colon cancer. But this
study also has its limitations; first it includes only 5
cohort studies, and the way heme intake was measured
differs in each study. Lee and colleagues and Larsson and
colleagues calculated heme iron content in the diet by
applying a factor of 0.4 to the total iron content of all
meat items which essentially is reporting an overall red
meat effect (16, 18). Balder and colleagues multiplied the
heme iron content of each meat item by the mean daily
intake of the relevant food item, estimated from the
Dutch Food Composition Database (17), but the 2 meth-
ods yielded similar results (15). Cross and colleagues
developed a new heme iron database based on measured
values in conjunction with a detailed meat cooking ques-
tionnaire (19).

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Prev Res; 4(2) February 2011

179

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

Bastide et al.

with epidemiological evidence. Heme promotion may
explain why the intake of red and processed meat is
associated with a risk of CRC.

Possible mechanisms of heme toxicity in the
gastrointestinal tract

The mechanisms implicated in the promotion of color-
ectal cancer by heme are poorly understood. The mechan-
istic hypotheses are based on the catalytic effect of heme
iron on (i) the formation of NOC and (ii) the formation of
lipid oxidation endproducts.

Heme iron catalyzes N-nitrosation

NOC are formed by N-nitrosation of amines and
amides, produced primarily by bacterial decarboxylation
of amino acids in the presence of a nitrosating agent
(30). There was no a priori reason to think that nitrosa-
tion would require heme iron. The structure of nitrosa-
mine is shown in Figure 1. NOC can be detected by
thermal energy analysis following the release of nitric
oxide from biological samples. This analytical procedure
comprises nitrosyl iron and S-nitrosothiols in addition to
nitrosamines and nitrosamides, which are collectively
total N-nitroso compounds
referred to as apparent
(ATNC; ref. 31).

Animal and human studies. Bacon-fed rats had a fecal
concentration of ATNC 10 to 20 times higher than control
rats (32). In addition, mice fed a diet of hot-dogs (18%),
had 4 to 5 times more ATNC, and mice fed a beef diet had 2
to 3 times more ATNC in their feces than controls fed no
meat (33, 34).

Human volunteers given a high red meat diet excreted
much more ATNC in their stools than controls given no
or little red meat, or only white meat (31, 35, 36). The
fecal concentration of ATNC was 60 times higher in
volunteers given cured red meat
than in volunteers
given a vegetarian diet (37). Heme iron, and not inor-
ganic iron or meat proteins, may be responsible for the
nitrosation observed in the gut of volunteers fed red
meat (38).

Nature of ATNC. A red meat diet increased nitrosyl
iron and nitrosothiols in ileal outputs and in stools of
volunteers, compared with a vegetarian diet, suggesting
that these compounds contribute significantly to ATNC
(39, 40). Nitrosothiols are rapidly formed from nitrite
and thiol groups at low pH in the stomach and can be
precursors for the formation of nitrosyl heme and NOC in
the gut (39). The strong correlation between fecal nitrosyl
iron and fecal heme suggests that nitrosyl heme is the
main source of nitrosyl
iron (39). Moreover, ATNC
precursors from hot dogs were partially purified and
separated by HPLC (41). One fraction was identified as
1-deoxy-N-1-glucosyl glycine by mass spectrometry, and
the nitrosated fraction was shown to be mutagenic by the
Ames test (41).

Carcinogenicity of nitrosated compounds. The carcino-
genicity of ATNC formed in the gut after eating heme from
red or processed meat is unknown. Parnaud and colleagues

found no initiation or promotion of preneoplastic lesions
by ATNC in the colon of rats fed a bacon-based diet (32).
Kunhle and colleagues speculated that nitrosyl iron com-
pounds and nitrosothiols may contribute to the tumoro-
genic potential of
in a
commentary on Kunhle’s article, Hogg speculated that
the sequestration of the "nitrosating potential" of the diet
as nitrosothiol or as nitrosyl iron may be a protective
mechanism that would limit the formation of DNA alky-
lating agents (42).

the diet (39). By contrast,

However, several arguments suggest that ATNC may be
important genotoxins. First, most NOC, such as nitrosa-
mines, nitrosamides, and nitrosoguanidines, can yield
alkylating agents during metabolism, and cause DNA
damage. For instance N-methyl-N-nitrosurea intrarectally
perfused induced G ! A transitions in K-ras in 30% of rat
colon carcinoma (43). In addition, nitrosated glycine deri-
vatives reacted with DNA to give rise to promutagenic and
toxic adducts including O6-methylguanine and O6-carbox-
ymethylguanine (44). O6-Carboxymethylguanine adducts
were found in stool exfoliated colonocytes from volunteers
eating red meat, with a correlation between the level of
adducts and of fecal ATNC, suggesting that ATNC are
genotoxic (45). Moreover, potassium diazoacetate, a stable
form of nitrosated glycine, was shown to induce mutations
in the p53 gene in a functional yeast assay (46). The
patterns of mutations were similar to the patterns observed
in human colon tumors. This supports the hypotheses that
nitrosation of compounds related to glycine contributes to
p53 mutations in humans, and that O6-carboxymethylgua-
nine adducts in exfoliated colorectal cells are related to
CRC (46).

Heme iron catalyzes the oxidation of polyunsaturated
fats



(lipid alkoxy radical) þ 

The polyunsaturated fatty acid residues of phospholi-
pids are extremely sensitive to oxidation. Lipid peroxida-
tion is initiated by free-radical attack of membrane lipids
and is catalyzed by heme with the following reaction:
LOOH (lipid hydroperoxide) þ Fe-ligand (heme) !
LOOFe ligands ! LO
OFe
ligands (heme oxiradical; ref. 47). The initial products
of unsaturated fatty acid oxidation are lipid hydroper-
oxides, but they are relatively short lived. They are either
reduced by glutathione peroxidase to unreactive fatty acid
alcohols or they react with metals to produce a variety of
reactive compounds such as epoxides and aldehydes. The
major aldehyde products of lipid peroxidation are mal-
ondialdehyde (MDA) and 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE;
ref. 48). These dietary lipid oxidation end products are
risk factors for several human diseases (for review, see
refs. 49, 50).

Malondialdehyde. MDA is formed by oxidation of poly-
unsaturated fatty acids with 2 or more double bonds.
MDA-induced DNA damage is mutagenic in bacterial,
mammalian, and human cells (51–53). MDA reacts with
DNA to form adducts with deoxyguanosine, deoxyadeno-
sine, and deoxycytidine (for review, see ref. 54). The major

180

Cancer Prev Res; 4(2) February 2011

Cancer Prevention Research

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

Heme Iron and Colorectal Cancer

Figure 3. Catalytic effects of heme
on the formation of ATNC and lipid
peroxidation, and their inhibition.
Consequences for the
development of CRC. Heme
catalyzes the formation of ATNC
and lipid peroxidation
endproducts, which partially
explains the promoting effect of
red and processed meat on CRC.
The catalytic effects of heme can
be inhibited by trapping the heme
(calcium, chlorophyll). The
endogenous formation of ATNC is
inhibited by vitamins C and E, and
it appears that polyphenols can
inhibit lipid peroxidation.

DNA adduct formed by reaction of MDA with DNA is 1,N2-
malondialdehyde-deoxyguanosine (M1dG). M1dG was
detected in colorectal biopsies from normal mucosa of
162 participants in the United Kingdom FlexiScope Sig-
moidoscopy Screening Trial and the EPIC study (55). The
level of this adduct was modulated by dietary and lifestyle
habits, and there is to higher M1dG levels in subjects with
adenoma compared with adenoma-free subjects (P <
0.005; ref. 55).

4-Hydroxynonenal.

In contrast with MDA, 4-HNE is
weakly mutagenic but appears to be the main toxic
product of lipid peroxidation (Fig. 1). 4-HNE has power-
ful effects on signal transduction pathways and some of
its effects appear to be independent of DNA damage (48).
Indeed, 4-HNE present in fecal water can induce apop-
tosis and necrosis of human colon carcinoma cells
through caspase 3 activation (56). Mutations in the
adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) gene on the chromosome
5q21 locus are considered to be one of the earliest events
in the initiation of CRC (57). Moreover, Apc mutation
was shown to reduce the level of caspases 3, 7, and 9 in
mouse colonocytes, leading to resistance to apoptosis
(58). An intestinal cell line derived from C57BL/6J mice
þ
(Apcþ/þ
) retained the hetero-
zygous Apc genotype and the disordered actin cytoskele-
ton network for the Apc Min/
cell line (59, 60). By

) and Min mice (Apc Min/
þ

exposing this cell line to fecal water of heme-fed rats or
to 4-HNE, Pierre and colleagues showed that apoptosis
was suppressed in Apc Min/
cells (61). The heterozygote
Apc mutation is thus a strong selective advantage for
colonic
cells exposed to a lipoperoxidation-related
genotoxic environment such as excess heme iron or 4-
HNE (61).

þ

In summary, heme catalyzes the formation of ATNC and
of lipid oxidation end products, which may explain the
promoting effects of red and processed meat on CRC.
However, the procarcinogenic effect of heme can be inhib-
ited by several molecules. First, calcium salts and chloro-
phyll can precipitate heme molecules and inhibit the
cytotoxic and hyperproliferative effect of heme in the rat
epithelium (17, 20–22, 62, 63). Moreover, the endogenous
formation of ATNC is inhibited by vitamins C and E, and
lipoperoxidation is inhibited by several polyphenols such
as quercetin, a-tocopherol, or red wine polyphenols (64–
68). The catalytic effects of heme and its inhibition are
summarized in Figure 3.

Conclusion

CRC is the leading cause of cancer death among non-
smokers in affluent countries, and its prevention is thus a
major goal for public health. Epidemiological studies

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Prev Res; 4(2) February 2011

181

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

Bastide et al.

demonstrate a modest but significant and consistent
relation between red meat and processed meat intake
and CRC risk. The dietary recommendations are to reduce
red meat intake and to avoid processed meat intake (1).
However, meat is an important source of proteins, pro-
viding all essential amino acids, and it is an excellent
source of iron and zinc. Iron deficiency is the most
widespread nutritional disorder in the world, especially
among children and premenopausal women, and results
in iron deficiency anemia (1). Knowledge of the mechan-
ism of CRC promotion by meat may allow an alternative
prevention strategy to be developed: inhibiting red and
processed meat toxicity instead of stopping meat intake.
Among the hypotheses
explaining the association
between meat intake and the risk of CRC, the effect of
heme iron is supported by both epidemiological (Fig. 2)
and experimental evidence (Supplementary Fig. S1). Sev-
eral mechanisms may explain the effect of heme on CRC,
and the 2 major hypotheses are: (i) heme catalyzes the
endogenous formation of ATNC; and (ii) heme catalyzes
the peroxidation of dietary fats (Fig. 3). Calcium salts,
chlorophyll, vitamin C, and several polyphenols may

reduce these deleterious effects of heme. Specific recom-
mendations might be made, for example, "eat a yogurt
after your steak." Moreover, vitamins or polyphenols
could be added during the curing process. Ascorbic acid
is already added during the processing of processed meats
specifically to inhibit the formation of volatile NOC in
the meat (69). We expect that this will reduce the risk of
CRC without losing the benefit and the pleasure of eating
meat.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interests

No potential conflicts of interests were disclosed.

Acknowledgments

We thank Luc Dauchet (INSERM, CHU Rouen, France) for his advice
concerning the meta-analysis, and Daphne Goodfellow who carefully read
the manuscript and corrected typographical and grammatical errors.

Received May 12, 2010; revised November 22, 2010; accepted December

1, 2010; published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011.

References
1. WCRF. Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention of
Cancer: A Global Perspective. Washington, DC: WCRF and American
Institute for Cancer Research; 2007. p. 1–537.

2. Cummings JH, Bingham SA. Diet and the prevention of cancer. BMJ

1998;317:1636–40.

3. Sandhu MS, White IR, Mcpherson K. Systematic review of the pro-
spective cohort studies on meat consumption and colorectal cancer
risk: a meta-analytical approach. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
2001;10:439–46.

5.

4. Norat T, Lukanova A, Ferrari P, Riboli E. Meat consumption and
colorectal cancer risk: dose-response meta-analysis of epidemiolo-
gical studies. Int J Cancer 2002;98:241–56.
Larsson SC, Wolk A. Meat consumption and risk of colorectal cancer: a
meta-analysis of prospective studies. Int J Cancer 2006;119:2657–64.
6. Sinha R, Rothman N, Brown ED, Mark SD, Hoover RN, Caporaso NE,
et al. Pan-fried meat containing high levels of heterocyclic aromatic
amines but low levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons induces
cytochrome p4501a2 activity in humans. Cancer Res 1994;54:6154–
9.

7. Stavric B. Biological significance of trace levels of mutagenic hetero-
cyclic aromatic amines in human diet: a critical review. Food Chem
Toxicol 1994;32:977–94.

8. Nauss KM, Locniskar M, Newberne PM. Effect of alteration in the
quality and quantity of dietary fat on DMH-induced colon tumorigen-
esis in rats. Cancer Res 1983;43:4083–90.

9. Nutter RL, Gridley DS, Kettering JD, Goude AG, Slater JM. BALB/c
mice fed milk or beef protein: differences in response to 1,2-
dimethylhydrazine carcinogenesis. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;71:
867–74.

10. Clinton SK, Imrey PB, Mangian HJ, Nandkumar S, Visek WJ. The
combined effects of dietary fat, protein, and energy intake on
azoxymethane-induced intestinal and renal carcinogenesis. Cancer
Res 1992;52:857–65.

11. Alexander DD, Cushing CA, Lowe KA, Sceurman B, Roberts MA.
Meta-analysis of animal fat or animal protein intake and colorectal
cancer. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;89:1402–9.

12. Santarelli RL, Pierre F, Corpet DE. Processed meat and colorectal
cancer: a review of epidemiologic and experimental evidence. Nutr
Cancer 2008;60:131–44.

13. Sesink ALA, Termont DSML, Kleibeuker JH, Vandermeer R. Red meat
and colon cancer: the cytotoxic and hyperproliferative effects of
dietary heme. Cancer Res 1999;59:5704–9.

14. Schwartz S, Ellefson M. Quantitative fecal recovery of

ingested
hemoglobin-heme in blood: comparisons by HemoQuant assay with
ingested meat and fish. Gastroenterology 1985;89:19–26.

15. Kabat GC, Miller AB, Jain M, Rohan TE. A cohort study of dietary iron
and heme iron intake and risk of colorectal cancer in women. Br J
Cancer 2007;97:118–22.

16. Larsson SC, Adami HO, Giovannucci E, Wolk A. Re: Heme iron, zinc,
alcohol consumption, and risk of colon cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst
2005;97:232–3.

17. Balder HF, Vogel J, Jansen MC, Weijenberg MP, Van den Brandt PA,
Westenbrink S, et al. Heme and chlorophyll intake and risk of color-
ectal cancer in the Netherlands cohort study. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 2006;15:717–25.

18. Lee DH, Anderson KE, Harnack LJ, Folsom AR, Jacobs DR Jr. Heme
iron, zinc, alcohol consumption, and colon cancer: Iowa Women's
Health Study. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:403–7.

19. Cross AJ, Ferrucci LM, Risch A, Graubard BI, Ward MH, Park Y, et al. A
large prospective study of meat consumption and colorectal cancer
risk: an investigation of potential mechanisms underlying this asso-
ciation. Cancer Res 2010;70:2406–14.

20. Sesink ALA, Termont DSML, Kleibeuker JH, VanDerMeer R. Red meat
and colon cancer: dietary haem-induced colonic cytotoxicity and
epithelial hyperproliferation are inhibited by calcium. Carcinogenesis
2001;22:1653–9.

21. Pierre F, Tache S, Petit CR, Van Der Meer R, Corpet DE. Meat and
cancer: haemoglobin and haemin in a low-calcium diet promote
colorectal carcinogenesis at the aberrant crypt stage in rats. Carci-
nogenesis 2003;24:1683–90.

22. Pierre F, Santarelli R, Tache S, Gueraud F, Corpet DE. Beef meat
promotion of dimethylhydrazine-induced colorectal carcinogenesis

182

Cancer Prev Res; 4(2) February 2011

Cancer Prevention Research

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

biomarkers is suppressed by dietary calcium. Br J Nutr 2008;99:1000–
6.

23. Grant WB. An ecological study of cancer mortality rates including
indices for dietary iron and zinc. Anticancer Res 2008;28:1955–
63.

24. Sawa T, Akaike T, Kida K, Fukushima Y, Takagi K, Maeda H. Lipid
peroxyl radicals from oxidized oils and heme-iron: implication of a
high-fat diet in colon carcinogenesis. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 1998;7:1007–12.

25. Pierre F, Freeman A, Tache S, Van Der Meer R, Corpet DE. Beef meat
and blood sausage promote the formation of azoxymethane-induced
mucin-depleted foci and aberrant crypt foci
in rat colons. J Nutr
2004;134:2711–6.

26. Parnaud G, Peiffer G, Tache S, Corpet DE. Effect of meat (beef,
chicken, and bacon) on rat colon carcinogenesis. Nutr Cancer
1998;32:165–73.

27. Pierre FH, Santarelli RL, Allam O, Tache S, Naud N, Gueraud F, et al.
azoxymethane-induced mucin-
in rat colon. Nutr Cancer

Freeze-dried ham promotes
depleted foci and aberrant crypt foci
2010;62:567–73.

28. Santarelli RL, Vendeuvre JL, Naud N, Tache S, Gueraud F, Viau M,
et al. Meat processing and colon carcinogenesis: cooked, nitrite-
treated, and oxidized high-heme cured meat promotes mucin-
depleted foci in rats. Cancer Prev Res 2010;3:852–64.

29. Belobrajdic DP, Mcintosh GH, Owens JA. Whey proteins protect more
than red meat against azoxymethane induced ACF in Wistar rats.
Cancer Lett 2003;198:43–51.

30. Mirvish SS. Role of N-nitroso compounds (NOC) and N-nitrosation in
etiology of gastric, esophageal, nasopharyngeal and bladder cancer
and contribution to cancer of known exposures to NOC. Cancer Lett
1995;93:17–48.

31. Hughes R, Cross AJ, Pollock JRA, Bingham S. Dose-dependent effect
of dietary meat on endogenous colonic N-nitrosation. Carcinogenesis
2001;22:199–202.

32. Parnaud G, Pignatelli B, Peiffer G, Tache S, Corpet DE. Endogenous
N-nitroso compounds, and their precursors, present in bacon, do not
initiate or promote aberrant crypt foci in the colon of rats. Nutr Cancer
2000;38:74–80.

33. Haorah J, Mirvish SS. Determination of total N-nitroso compounds
and their precursors in Franfurters, fresh meat, dried salted fish,
sauces, tobaco, and tobacco smoke particulates. J Agric Food Chem
2001;49:6068–78.

34. Mirvish SS, Haorah J, Zhou L, Hartman M, Morris CR, Clapper ML.
N-Nitroso compounds in the gastrointestinal tract of rats and in the
feces of mice with induced colitis or fed hot dogs or beef. Carcino-
genesis 2003;24:595–603.

35. Bingham SA, Pignatelli B, Pollock JRA, Ellul A, Malaveille C, Gross G,
et al. Does increased endogenous formation of N-nitroso compounds
in the human colon explain the association between red meat and
colon cancer? Carcinogenesis 1996;17:515–23.

36. Bingham SA, Hughes R, Cross AJ. Effect of white versus red meat on
endogenous N-nitrosation in the human colon and further evidence of
a dose response. J Nutr 2002;132:3522S–5S.

37. Joosen AM, Kuhnle GG, Aspinall SM, Barrow TM, Lecommandeur
E, Azqueta A, et al. Effect of processed and red meat on endogen-
ous nitrosation and DNA damage. Carcinogenesis 2009;30:1402–
7.

38. Cross AJ, Pollock JRA, Bingham SA. Haem, not protein or inorganic
iron, is responsible for endogenous intestinal N-nitrosation arising
from red meat. Cancer Res 2003;63:2358–60.

39. Kuhnle GG, Bingham SA. Dietary meat, endogenous nitrosation and

colorectal cancer. Biochem Soc Trans 2007;35:1355–7.

40. Lunn JC, Kuhnle G, Mai V, Frankenfeld C, Shuker DE, Glen RC, et al. The
effect of haem in red and processed meat on the endogenous formation
of N-nitroso compounds in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Carcinogen-
esis 2007;28:685–90.

41. Zhou L, Haorah J, Perini F, Carmella SG, Shibamoto T, Mirvish SS.
Partial purification from hot dogs of N-nitroso compound precursors
and their mutagenicity after nitrosation. J Agric Food Chem
2006;54:5679–87.

Heme Iron and Colorectal Cancer

42. Hogg N. Red meat and colon cancer: heme proteins and nitrite in
the gut. A commentary on "diet-induced endogenous formation of
nitroso compounds in the GI tract". Free Radic Biol Med 2007;43:
1037–9.

43. Jacoby RF, Alexander RJ, Raicht RF, Brasitus TA. K-ras oncogene
mutations in rat colon tumors induced by N-methyl-N-nitrosourea.
Carcinogenesis 1992;13:45–9.

44. Shuker DE, Margison GP. Nitrosated glycine derivatives as a potential

source of O6-methylguanine in DNA. Cancer Res 1997;57:366–9.

45. Lewin MH, Bailey N, Bandaletova T, Bowman R, Cross AJ, Pollock J,
et al. Red meat enhances the colonic formation of the DNA adduct O6-
carboxymethyl guanine: implications for colorectal cancer risk. Can-
cer Res 2006;66:1859–65.

46. Gottschalg E, Scott GB, Burns PA, Shuker DE. Potassium diazoace-
tate-induced p53 mutations in vitro in relation to formation of O6-
carboxymethyl- and O6-methyl-20-deoxyguanosine DNA adducts:
relevance for gastrointestinal cancer. Carcinogenesis 2007;28:356–
62.

47. Tappel A. Heme of consumed red meat can act as a catalyst
of oxidative damage and could initiate colon, breast and prostate
cancers, heart disease and other diseases. Med Hypotheses
2007;68:562–4.

48. Marnett LJ. Oxyradicals and DNA damage. Carcinogenesis

2000;21:361–70.

49. Kanner J. Dietary advanced lipid oxidation endproducts are risk

factors to human health. Mol Nutr Food Res 2007;51:1094–101.

50. Corpet DE, Gueraud F, O’Brien P. Heme iron from dietary meat
produces pro-carcinogenic peroxides endogenously. In: Bruce WR,
O’Brien P, editors. Endogenous Toxins: Diet, Genetics, Disease and
Treatment. Wiley-VCH; 2010. p. 133–49.

51. Basu AK, Marnett LJ. Unequivocal demonstration that malondialde-

hyde is a mutagen. Carcinogenesis 1983;4:331–3.

52. Yau TM. Mutagenicity and cytotoxicity of malonaldehyde in mamma-

lian cells. Mech Ageing Dev 1979;11:137–44.

53. Niedernhofer LJ, Daniels JS, Rouzer CA, Greene RE, Marnett LJ.
Malondialdehyde, a product of lipid peroxidation, is mutagenic in
human cells. J Biol Chem 2003;278:31426–33.

54. Marnett LJ. Lipid peroxidation-DNA damage by malondialdehyde.

Mutat Res 1999;424:83–95.

55. Leuratti C, Watson MA, Deag EJ, Welch A, Singh R, Gottschalg E,
et al. Detection of malondialdehyde DNA adducts in human colorectal
mucosa: relationship with diet and the presence of adenomas. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2002;11:267–73.

56. Awasthi YC, Sharma R, Cheng JZ, Yang Y, Sharma A, Singhal SS,
et al. Role of 4-hydroxynonenal in stress-mediated apoptosis signal-
ing. Mol Aspects Med 2003;24:219–30.

57. Powell SM, Zilz N, Beazer-Barclay Y, Bryan TM, Hamilton SR,
Thibodeau SN, et al. APC mutations occur early during colorectal
tumorigenesis. Nature 1992;359:235–7.

58. Chen T, Yang I, Irby R, Shain KH, Wang HG, Quackenbush J, et al.
Regulation of caspase expression and apoptosis by adenomatous
polyposis coli. Cancer Res 2003;63: 4368–74.

59. Pierre F, Perrin P, Bassonga E, Bornet F, Meflah K, Menanteau J. T cell
status influences colon tumor occurrence in min mice fed short chain
fructo-oligosaccharides as a diet supplement. Carcinogenesis 1999;
20:1953–6.
60. Forest V, Pierre F, Bassonga E, Meflah K, Olivier C, Menanteau J.
Apcþ/min colonic epithelial cells express TNF receptors and ICAM-1
when they are co-cultured with large intestine intra-epithelial lympho-
cytes. Cell Immunol 2003;223:70–6.

61. Pierre F, Tache S, Gueraud F, Rerole AL, Jourdan ML, Petit C. Apc
mutation induces resistance of colonic cells to lipoperoxide-triggered
apoptosis induced by faecal water from haem-fed rats. Carcinogen-
esis 2007;28:321–7.

62. de Vogel J, Jonker-Termont DS, van Lieshout EM, Katan MB, Van Der
Meer R. Green vegetables, red meat and colon cancer: chlorophyll
prevents the cytotoxic and hyperproliferative effects of haem in rat
colon. Carcinogenesis 2005;26:387–93.

63. de Vogel J, Jonker-Termont DS, Katan MB, Van Der Meer R. Natural
chlorophyll but not chlorophyllin prevents heme-induced cytotoxic

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Prev Res; 4(2) February 2011

183

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

Bastide et al.

and hyperproliferative effects in rat colon. J Nutr 2005;135:1995–
2000.

64. Mirvish SS. Effects of vitamins C and E on N-nitroso compound

formation, carcinogenesis, and cancer. Cancer 1986;58:1842–50.

65. Douglass ML, Kabacoff BL, Anderson GA, Cheng MC. The chemistry
of nitrosamine formation, inhibition and destruction. J Soc Cosmet
Chem 1978;29:581–606.

66. Ross JA, Kasum CM. Dietary flavonoids: bioavailability, metabolic

effects, and safety. Annu Rev Nutr 2002;22:19–34.

67. Vulcain E, Goupy P, Caris-Veyrat C, Dangles O. Inhibition of the
metmyoglobin-induced peroxidation of linoleic acid by dietary anti-
oxidants: action in the aqueous vs. lipid phase. Free Radic Res
2005;39:547–63.

68. Gorelik S, Ligumsky M, Kohen R, Kanner J. A novel function of red
wine polyphenols in humans: prevention of absorption of cytotoxic
lipid peroxidation products. FASEB J 2008;22:41–6.

69. Mirvish SS. Blocking the formation of N-nitroso compounds with
ascorbic acid in vitro and in vivo. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1975;258:175–80.

184

Cancer Prev Res; 4(2) February 2011

Cancer Prevention Research

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113 

Heme Iron from Meat and Risk of Colorectal Cancer: A
Meta-analysis and a Review of the Mechanisms Involved
(cid:160) 
Nadia M. Bastide, Fabrice H.F. Pierre and Denis E. Corpet
(cid:160) 
Cancer Prev Res(cid:160)

2011;4:177-184. Published OnlineFirst January 5, 2011.

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

Updated version
(cid:160) 
Supplementary
Material
(cid:160) 

10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0113
 

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:
(cid:160) 
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2017/11/18/1940-6207.CAPR
-10-0113.DC1
 
(cid:160) 

Cited articles
(cid:160) 
Citing articles
(cid:160) 

This article cites 67 articles, 22 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/4/2/177.full#ref-list-1
 
(cid:160) 
This article has been cited by 19 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
 
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/4/2/177.full#related-urls
(cid:160) 

E-mail alerts
(cid:160) 
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
(cid:160) 
Permissions
(cid:160) 

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

pubs@aacr.org
.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at
(cid:160) 
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
http://cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org/content/4/2/177
.
Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's
(CCC)
Rightslink site. 
(cid:160) 

Downloaded from 

for Cancer Research. 

cancerpreventionresearch.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2011 American Association

 ARTICLES 

 Dietary  Fat  Reduction  and  Breast  Cancer  Outcome:  Interim 
Efﬁ cacy  Results  From  the Women’s  Intervention  Nutrition  Study 
   Rowan T.     Chlebowski   ,    George L.     Blackburn   ,    Cynthia A.     Thomson   ,    Daniel W.     Nixon   , 
   Alice     Shapiro   ,    M. Katherine     Hoy   ,    Marc T.     Goodman   ,    Armando E.     Giuliano   ,    Njeri   
  Karanja   ,    Philomena     McAndrew   ,    Clifford     Hudis   ,    John     Butler   ,    Douglas     Merkel   ,    Alan   
  Kristal   ,    Bette     Caan   ,    Richard     Michaelson   ,    Vincent     Vinciguerra   ,    Salvatore     Del Prete   , 
   Marion     Winkler   ,    Rayna     Hall   ,    Michael     Simon   ,    Barbara L.     Winters   ,    Robert M.     Elashoff   

                       Background:   Preclinical and observational studies suggest a 
relationship between dietary fat intake and breast cancer, 
but the association remains controversial. We carried out a 
randomized,  prospective,  multicenter  clinical  trial  to  test 
the  effect  of  a  dietary  intervention  designed  to  reduce  fat 
intake  in  women  with  resected,  early-stage  breast  cancer 
receiving  conventional  cancer  management.    Methods:    A 
total  of  2437  women  were  randomly  assigned  between 
February  1994  and  January  2001  in  a  ratio  of  40  :  60  to 
dietary intervention (n = 975) or control (n = 1462) groups. 
An interim analysis was performed after a median follow-
up of 60 months when funding for the intervention ceased. 
Mean differences between dietary intervention and control 
groups  in  nutrient  intakes  and  anthropometric  variables 
were compared with   t   tests. Relapse-free survival was exam-
ined using Kaplan – Meier analysis, stratiﬁ ed log-rank tests, 
and Cox proportional hazards models. Statistical tests were 
two-sided.   Results:   Dietary fat intake was lower in the inter-
vention  than  in  the  control  group  (fat  grams/day  at  12 
months, 33.3 [95% conﬁ dence interval {CI} = 32.2 to 34.5] 
versus 51.3 [95% CI = 50.0 to 52.7], respectively;   P  <.001), 
corresponding  to  a  statistically  signiﬁ cant  (  P    =  .005), 
6-pound lower mean body weight in the intervention group. 
A total of 277 relapse events (local, regional, distant, or ipsi-
lateral breast cancer recurrence or new contralateral breast 
cancer) have been reported in 96 of 975 (9.8%) women in 
the  dietary  group  and  181  of  1462  (12.4%)  women  in  the 
control  group.  The  hazard  ratio  of  relapse  events  in  the 
intervention  group  compared  with  the  control  group  was 
0.76 (95% CI = 0.60 to 0.98,   P   = .077 for stratiﬁ ed log rank 
and   P   = .034 for adjusted Cox model analysis). Exploratory 
analyses suggested a differential effect of the dietary inter-
vention based on hormonal receptor status.   Conclusions:   A 
lifestyle intervention reducing dietary fat intake, with mod-
est inﬂ uence on body weight, may improve relapse-free sur-
vival of breast cancer patients re ceiving conventional cancer 
management.  Longer,  ongoing  nonintervention  follow-up 
will address original protocol design plans, which called for 
3 years of follow-up after completion of recruitment.   [J Natl 
Cancer Inst 2006;98: 1767  –  76 ]   

  The  question  of  the  inﬂ uence  of  dietary  fat  on  breast 
cancer has been controversial. Whereas preclinical and human 

ecologic studies have suggested an association of higher di-
etary  fat  intake  with  breast  cancer  risk   ( 1 , 2 ) ,  cohort  studies 
have reported less consistent effects  ( 3  –  5 ) . Similarly, observa-
tional studies of dietary fat inﬂ uence on breast cancer recur-
rence have had mixed results  ( 6 , 7 ) , with some suggesting that 
higher fat intake is associated with higher risk of recurrence, 
especially in postmenopausal women  ( 8  –  10 ) . The varying as-
sociations may be due to the modest range of fat intake seen 
and the difﬁ culty in accurately measuring fat intake with cur-
rent methods  ( 11 , 12 ) . 

 Feasibility trials have demonstrated that dietary fat reduction 
can  be  achieved  within  the  context  of  standard  multimodality 
breast  cancer  management  (  13 , 14  ). The Women’s  Intervention 
Nutrition Study (WINS) was subsequently designed to test the 
hypothesis  that  a  dietary  intervention  targeting  fat  intake 

    Afﬁ liations  of  authors:   Department  of  Medicine,  Los  Angeles  Biomedical 
Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA (RTC); Department 
of  Nutrition,  Beth  Israel  Deaconess  Hospital,  Boston,  MA  (GLB);  Department 
of  Family  and  Community  Medicine,  University  of Arizona, Tucson, AZ  (CAT); 
Department  of  Medicine,  Cancer  Prevention  Institute,  New  York,  NY  (DWN, 
MKH); Department of Oncology Research, Park Nicollet Institute, Minneapolis, 
MN (AS); Department of Public Health Sciences and Epidemiology, University 
of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI (MTG); Department of Surgery, John Wayne 
Cancer Institute, Los Angeles, CA (AEG); Science Programs Department, Kai-
ser Permanente Center for Health Research, Portland, OR (NK); Department of 
Hematology  and  Oncology,  Tower  Hematology  and  Oncology  Medical  Group, 
Beverly Hills, CA (PM); Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Can-
cer Center, New York, NY (CH); Department of Surgical Oncology, University of 
California, Irvine, CA (JB); Department of Medical Oncology, Evanston Hospital, 
Kellogg Cancer Care Center, Evanston, IL (DM); Department of Epidemiology, 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seatle, WA (AK); Division of Research, 
Kaiser Permanente Medical Group, Oakland, CA (BC); Department of Radia-
tion  Oncology,  St.  Barnabas  Medical  Center,  Livingston,  NJ  (RM);  Don  Monti 
Division of Medical Oncology, North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, NY 
(VV); Division of Hematology and Oncology, Bennett Cancer Center, Stamford, CT 
(SDP); Division of Surgical Research, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI (MW); 
Division  of  Medical  Oncology  and  Hematology,  Medical  University  of  South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC (RH); Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, 
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI (MS); Campbell’s Soup Co., Camden, NJ (BLW); 
Department of Biomathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA (RME). 
  Correspondence  to  :   Rowan  T.  Chlebowski,  MD,  PhD,  Divisions  of  Med-
ical Oncology and Hematology, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at 
Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 1124 West Carson St., Building J-3, Torrance, CA 
90502-2064 (e-mail:  rchlebow@whi.org ). 

   See   “ Notes ”  following  “ References. ”   

  DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djj494  
  © The Author 2006. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.  

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006 

ARTICLES  1767

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

reduction would prolong relapse-free survival in women with re-
sected breast cancer. 

  P ATIENTS  AND  M ETHODS  

  Study Overview 

 In this phase III multicenter randomized trial, the effect on 
relapse of a dietary intervention designed to reduce fat intake 
was compared with that of a control condition with minimal 
 dietary counseling in women with early-stage, resected breast 
cancer receiving conventional cancer management. Patients in 
this  study  were  accrued  in  approximately  7  years,  between 
February  1994  and  January  2001.  This  report  represents  an 
interim analysis after a median of 60 months of follow-up. The 
WINS trial protocol is available online as supplementary data 
at    http://jncicancerspectrum.oxfordjournals.org/jnci/content/
vol98/issue24  .  

  Study Population 

 Women  were  recruited  from  39  clinical  centers.  Eligibility 
criteria  included  histologically  conﬁ rmed,  resected,  unilateral 
invasive breast carcinoma; lymph node evaluation; age between 
48 and 79 years; life expectancy of at least 10 years excluding 
the cancer diagnosis; acceptable adjuvant systemic therapy (see 
below);  at  least  20%  of  calories  obtained  from  fat;  medically 
able to accept either randomization assignment; and trial entry 
within 365 days of surgery. Exclusion criteria included inﬂ am-
matory carcinoma; chest wall or skin involved; tumor size less 
than 1 cm with negative nodes; tumor size greater than 5 cm with 
positive nodes; 10 or more nodes positive; preoperative chemo-
therapy; or any previous neoplasm other than carcinoma in situ 
of the cervix or basal cell skin carcinoma. Eligibility was con-
ﬁ rmed by central review of medical records and pathology re-
ports.  The  Institutional  Review  Board  of  each  participating 
institution approved the study protocol. All patients gave written 
informed consent.  

  Standard Breast Cancer Management 

 Standard  breast  cancer  management  was  protocol  de  ﬁ ned, 
including adequate surgery and radiotherapy. Estrogen receptor 
(ER)  and  progesterone  receptor  (PgR)  status  (positive  or 
negative) was deﬁ ned by local laboratory standards. Women with 
ER-positive  tumors  received  tamoxifen  (20  mg  per  day)  for  5 
years. Chemotherapy with a protocol-approved regimen (adria-
mycin plus cyclophosphamide; cyclophosphamide plus metho-
trexate  plus  5-ﬂ uorouracil  in  two  schedules;  5-ﬂ uorouracil 
plus  adriamycin  plus  cyclophosphamide  in  two  schedules  [5-
 ﬂ uoruracil – adriamycin – cyclophosphamide or cyclophosphamide
 – adriamycin – fluorouracil]; or adriamycin – cyclophosphamide 
followed by paclitaxel) was required for women with ER- negative 
tumors  and  optional  for  those  with  ER-positive  tumors. As  an 
eligibility  criterion,  chemotherapy  had  to  be  initiated  within  4 
months  after  diagnosis  for  women  given  chemotherapy,  and 
tamoxifen had to be initiated within 6 months after diagnosis for 
those  given  only  tamoxifen.  Recommended  drug  dosages  and 
schedules paralleled those in use by cooperative group trials at 
the time  ( 15  –  17 ).   

  Randomization 

 Adaptive randomization was carried out at the Statistical Co-
ordinating Unit of the WINS study using a random stratiﬁ ed per-
muted block design. The trial was designed with an unbalanced 
randomization (60% control subjects, 40% dietary intervention 
subjects) to facilitate resource allocation to the dietary interven-
tion. Women  were  initially  stratiﬁ ed  according  to  lymph  node 
status  (negative  or  positive)  and  systemic  adjuvant  therapy 
 received  (tamoxifen  alone,  tamoxifen  plus  chemotherapy,  or 
 chemotherapy  alone). An  additional  stratum  for  sentinel  node 
evaluation (yes or no) was introduced in 1999 to reﬂ ect clinical 
practice trends.  

  Dietary Intervention and Study Assessments 

 The goal of the dietary intervention was to reduce percentage 
of  calories  from  fat  to  15%  while  maintaining  nutritional 
adequacy. Feasibility studies had indicated that this goal would 
result in a sustained reduction in fat intake to approximately 20% 
of calories  ( 14 ) , which was the basis for the sample size calcula-
tion.  Women  in  the  dietary  intervention  group  were  given  an 
individual fat gram goal and counseled by registered dieticians 
who  implemented  a  previously  developed  low-fat  eating  plan 
 ( 14  –  18 ) .  Study  dieticians  were  trained  centrally  on  diet  inter-
vention and dietary and anthropometric data collection. Training 
continued with annual workshops incorporating training on mo-
tivational interviewing and with monthly conference calls. 

 The low-fat eating plan, which was based on nutritional and 
behavioral science principles  ( 18 ) , incorporated social cognitive 
theory and included self-monitoring (fat gram counting and re-
cording), goal setting, modeling, social support, and relapse pre-
vention and management. Individual fat gram goals were based 
on energy intake needed to maintain weight, and no counseling 
on weight reduction was provided. The low-fat eating plan was 
initiated during eight biweekly individual, in-person counseling 
sessions, each lasting approximately 1 hour. Subsequent dietician 
contacts (visits or calls) occurred every 3 months, with available, 
optional monthly dietary group sessions. Women in the dietary 
intervention group were instructed to keep a written record of 
their fat gram intake daily throughout the trial using a previously 
developed  “ keeping score ”  book  ( 18 ) . Control subjects had one 
baseline  dietician  visit  and  contacts  with  a  dietician  every  3 
months  subsequently.  They  received  written  information  on 
general  dietary  guidelines  and  were  counseled  on  nutritional 
adequacy for vitamin and mineral intake only. 

 Questionnaires administered at baseline were used to collect 
information on demographic characteristics; medical, reproduc-
tive,  and  family  history;  personal  habits  such  as  smoking  and 
alcohol use; prior use of menopausal hormone therapy and oral 
contraceptives;  and  current  use  of  medications  and  dietary 
supplements. Weight and height were measured at baseline and 
annually using standardized techniques on calibrated scales/stadi-
ometer  ( 19 ) . Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight (in 
kilograms) divided by height (in meters) squared. 

 Unannounced telephone calls were used to estimate dietary 
intakes. Trained interviewers who were blinded to randomization 
status collected dietary information; the information was entered 
into the Nutrition Data System for Research interactive software 
as  previously  described   ( 18 ) .  A  multilayered  quality  control 
process was used to maintain nutrition data quality  ( 20 ) . Data on 

1768  ARTICLES 

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

dietary  intakes  from  three  follow-up  calls  (including  one  on  a 
weekend day) were collected over 2 weeks for eligibility deter-
mination regarding dietary fat intake. Two additional follow-up 
calls (including one on a weekend day) were made annually to 
collect updated data on dietary intakes for all women. 

 Recurrence  information  was  solicited  during  the  every-3-
month dietician contacts. Recurrences were conﬁ rmed initially 
by medical record and pathology report review by the clinical 
director  (RTC)  and  subsequently  by  the  WINS  Pathology 
 Committee, both of whom were blinded to random assignment.  

  Outcome Deﬁ nitions 

 The primary study endpoint was relapse-free survival, deﬁ ned 
as the time from random assignment to breast cancer recurrence 
at any site. Relapse events included local, regional, and distant 
recurrence; ipsilateral breast recurrence after lumpectomy; and 
contralateral breast cancer. Overall survival, deﬁ ned as the time 
from randomization to death from any cause, was a secondary 
endpoint. For comparability to other adjuvant trials  ( 15 , 21  –  24 ) , 
disease-free  survival  and  recurrence-free  survival  were  also 
examined. Disease-free survival events included any secondary 
invasive  cancers,  excluding  basal  and  squamous  skin  cancers, 
and  death  without  breast  cancer  recurrence.  Recurrence-free 
survival  events  included  local,  regional,  distant,  or  ipsilateral 
breast  recurrence  after  lumpectomy  but  excluded  contralateral 
breast cancer. Breast cancer size and nodal status were used to 
calculate tumor size – node – metastasis stage  ( 25 )  at baseline.  

  Termination of the Dietary Intervention 

 WINS  was  supported  by  a  multicenter  RO1  grant  from  the 
National Cancer Institute, with continued funding dependent on 
ongoing  peer  review.  Funding  for  the  clinical  centers  and  the 
active dietary intervention ended in May 2004, even though the 
protocol-deﬁ ned follow-up period had not been completed and 
even  though  secular  trends  in  therapy  had  reduced  recurrence 
events compared with the number of events projected at the time 
the study was designed. The WINS External Advisory Commit-
tee reviewed results of the last (November 2003) interim analysis 
(which incorporated nutrient data through August 31, 2003, and 
all  available  efﬁ cacy  data  through  October  31,  2003),  after  a 
median  follow-up  of  60  months.  Based  on  the  change  in  trial 
status,  both  the  WINS  External  Advisory  Committee  and  the 
WINS  Executive  Committee  supported  reporting  the  available 
results but recognized the need for additional follow-up. These 
results were presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncol-
ogy annual meeting  ( 26 )  on May 17, 2005, and were provided to 
study participants by mail. This interim efﬁ cacy report provides 
details of that dataset. The protocol design called for 3 years of 
follow-up after completion of recruitment through January 2004. 
Currently  ongoing  nonintervention  follow-up  will  address  the 
original design plans.  

  Statistical Analysis 

 Sample size was based on a model that generated power esti-
mates via simulation. Using published information from cooper-
ative group trials involving tamoxifen  ( 27 , 28  ), we calculated a 
total sample size of 2502 under assumptions of 6 years of ac-
crual,  3  years  of  follow-up  after  completion  of  accrual,  and  a 

7.5% increase in relapse-free survival with a drop-in (deﬁ ned as 
control group women with intake <20% of calories from fat at 
any interval while on study) rate of 10% and a drop-out rate of 
30% for 84% power at a two-sided alpha level of .05. 

 The primary efﬁ cacy analysis was a stratiﬁ ed log-rank test. 
Exploratory  Cox  proportional  hazards  models  for  relapse-free 
survival  were  investigated,  as  were  various  Cox  models  for 
prognostic  factors  in  addition  to  those  used  in  the  stratiﬁ ed 
randomization. The ﬁ nal Cox model included randomized group, 
stratiﬁ cation  factors  (ER  status  [positive  versus  negative]  and 
tumor size [<2 versus  ≥ 2 cm]), and surgery type (mastectomy 
versus  lumpectomy)  based  on  their  established  inﬂ uences  on 
breast cancer outcomes. The cumulative incidence method was 
applied for Cox model analyses. Model assessment suggested a 
reasonable data ﬁ t. The assumption of proportionality for Cox 
models was veriﬁ ed by graphical and numerical methods of Lin 
et al.  ( 29 ) . The  P  value for the Kolmogorov-type supremum test 
(for group) based on 1000 simulations was 0.5170, supporting 
the proportional hazards assumptions. 

 Analyses included all randomly assigned patients, following 
the intent-to-treat paradigm. All  P  values were derived from a 
two-sided  test  for  signiﬁ cance.  The  95%  conﬁ dence  interval 
(CI) for the hazard ratio (HR) was obtained for each term in the 
ﬁ nal Cox model, with particular attention to the interaction be-
tween treatment and other factors in the model. The  P  values and 
conﬁ dence intervals are exploratory. Five protocol-planned in-
terim  analyses  were  carried  out  between  February  2000  and 
November 2003. The Haybitle – Peto approach to the  α -spending 
function  was  used  to  account  for  interim  analyses   ( 30 ) .  The 
Kaplan – Meier method was used to calculate probability estimates 
for  relapse-free  and  overall  survival.  In  exploratory  analyses, 
which were not deﬁ ned prospectively, dietary effects on relapse-
free survival in subgroups based on BMI, hormone receptor sta-
tus, and nodal status were examined using the Cox model. Tests 
for interaction used Cox models and a likelihood ratio test. Dif-
ferences in baseline variables between and within groups were 
analyzed using  t  tests or paired  t  tests or the appropriate tests 
with categorical variables. The  t  tests were performed to com-
pare  differences  in  the  nutrient  intakes  and  anthropometric 
variables, and corresponding 95% conﬁ dence intervals are reported.   

  R ESULTS  

 A  total  of  2437  apparently  eligible  women  were  randomly 
 assigned, 975 to the dietary intervention group and 1462 to the 
control  group  ( Fig.  1 ).  Thirty-four  women  (12  in  the  dietary 
group and 22 in the control group) were subsequently found to 
be ineligible, most commonly based on a longer interval from 
diagnosis and/or use of other chemotherapy (n = 10), pagetoid 
nipple  involvement  (n  =  9),  or  size  or  margin  issues  (n  =  5). 
However, all randomly assigned patients are included in the pre-
sented analyses.     

 The  characteristics  of  the  participants  were  well  balanced 
across the two groups ( Table 1 ). The characteristics of the breast 
cancers  of  study  participants  and  the  therapy  given  for  these 
cancers by treatment group are provided in  Table 2 . Breast can-
cer characteristics were closely comparable in the two groups. 
Breast cancer therapy was also closely comparable in the two 
groups, except for the type of primary surgery. More women in 
the dietary intervention compared to control group had mastec-
tomy rather than breast-conserving therapy ( P  = .004).         

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006 

ARTICLES  1769

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

   Fig.  1.    CONSORT  trial  ﬂ ow  diagram.  Detailed  reasons 
for  not  completing  study  were  as  follows.  Not  receiving 
intervention, intervention group: lost interest in study (n = 4), 
personal – family problem (n = 2), did not like low-fat eating 
plan (n = 1). Not receiving intervention, control group: lost 
interest in study (n = 2), did not like control group allocation 
(n  =  3).  Lost  to  follow-up,  intervention  group:  unable  to 
contact participant (n = 24), not interested in study (n = 3), 
personal – family problem (n = 2), did not like low-fat eating 
plan  (n  =  3),  medical  problem  (n  =  3),  time  commitment 
(n = 2), 5 years was enough (n = 2), moved (n = 1), refused 
to be contacted (n = 4), unknown (n = 1). Lost to follow-
up,  control  group:  unable  to  contact  participant  (n  =  39), 
not  interested  in  study  (n  =  5),  personal – family  problem 
(n = 2), did not like control group (n = 2), medical problem 
(n = 2), time commitment (n = 2), 5 years was enough (n = 2), 
moved (n = 2), refused to be contacted (n = 6), unknown 
(n  =  4).  Discontinued  study,  intervention  group:  unable 
to contact the participant (n = 49), not interested in study 
(n  =  15),  personal – family  problem  (n  =  26),  did  not  like 
low-fat  eating  plan  (n  =  21),  medical  problem  (n  =  12), 
time commitment (n = 10), 5 years was enough (n = 23), 
moved (n = 7), refused to be contacted (n = 3), unknown 
(n = 4). Discontinued study, control group: unable to contact 
the  participant  (n  =  51),  not  interested  in  study  (n  =  7), 
personal – family problem (n = 6), did not like control group 
(n = 1), medical problem (n = 3), time commitment (n = 5), 
5 years was enough (n = 15), moved (n = 3), refused to be 
contacted (n = 8), unknown (n = 7).   

t
n
e
m

l
l
o
r
n
E

n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l

A

p
u
-
w
o
l
l
o
F

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
A

Assessed for eligibility

(n=68325)

Excluded (n=65888) 

Not meeting inclusion
criteria (n=62859) 
Declined participation
(n=3029)

Randomly assigned (n=2437) 

Allocated to Dietary Intervention (n=975) 

Allocated to Control (n=1462)

Received allocated intervention
(n=968)
Did not receive intervention (n=7) 

Received allocated intervention
(n=1457)
Did not receive intervention (n=5)

Lost to follow-up (n=45)
Discontinued intervention (n=170)

Lost to follow-up (n=66)
Discontinued intervention (n=106)

Analyzed (n=975)

Analyzed (n=1462)

 As of October 31, 2003, 95% of the women in the dietary in-
tervention group and 94% of those in the control group were be-
ing  followed  as  part  of  the  study  or  had  experienced  a  study 
event, with 84% of women in the dietary intervention group and 
89% of those in the control group contacted within 12 months of 
October  31,  2003  ( Fig.  1 ).  The  median  interval  between  last 
contact and the analysis closeout date was 2.6 months for women 
in the  dietary intervention group and 3.1 months for those in the 
control group. 

and supplement use. No adverse events were associated with 
the dietary intervention.     

 Body  weight  was  not  an  intervention  target.  However, 
there was a modest but statistically signiﬁ cant ( P  = .005) weight 
difference  of  about  6  pounds  between  groups,  with  dietary 
 intervention women weighing less through 5 years of observa-
tion. Changes in BMI in both groups reﬂ ect the weight changes 
observed ( Table 3 ).  

  Adherence to Dietary Intervention 

  Efﬁ cacy 

 The  dietary  intervention  adherence  results  are  based  on 
telephone  follow-up  calls. The  reported  dietary  intake  differ-
ences by randomization group over time are outlined in  Table 3 . 
In all, 80% of women provided dietary data for at least three 
time periods after baseline. After 1 year, mean daily fat gram 
intake was slightly reduced in the control group (from 56.3 g at 
baseline  to  51.3  g  at  12  months,  mean  difference  =   − 5.09  g, 
95% CI =  − 6.5 to  − 3.7,  P <.0001) but was reduced to a statisti-
cally  signiﬁ cantly  greater  extent  in  the  dietary  intervention 
group (from 57.3 g at baseline to 33.3 g at 12 months, mean 
difference  =   − 24.4  g,  95%  CI  =   − 26.1  to   − 22.6,   P <.0001; 
 P <.001 comparing the mean difference between groups). The 
difference in fat gram intake was maintained through 5 years 
(difference in fat grams per day in dietary versus control groups 
of  − 18.0 g [95% CI =  − 19.9 to  − 16.1] at 12 months and  − 19.0 g 
[95% CI =  − 22.1 to  − 16.0] at 60 months [both  P <.0001]). Sim-
ilar differences were seen for all fat categories and in percent-
age  of  calories  from  fat  ( Table  3 ).  In  addition,  energy  intake 
was somewhat lower and ﬁ ber intake slightly higher in inter-
vention  group  participants  ( Table  3 ).  Nutrient  adequacy  was 
maintained  in  both  groups,  with  the  exception  of  calcium, 
 vitamin  D,  and  vitamin  E,  for  which  intakes  were  somewhat 
below recommended levels at baseline and throughout the trial 
in both groups, a situation that was addressed with counseling 

 After  a  median  of  60  months,  277  relapse-free  survival 
events  and  389  disease-free  survival  events  were  reported 
( Table 4 ). Recurrence events were conﬁ rmed by central review 
in  99.5%  of  cases.  For  relapse-free  survival — the  primary 
 endpoint — the hazard ratio of an event in the dietary interven-
tion compared with the control group was 0.76 (95% CI = 0.60 
to 0.98) ( Fig. 2 ,  P  = .077 for stratiﬁ ed log rank and  P  = .034 for 
adjusted  Cox  model  analysis).  For  recurrence-free  survival 
(i.e., excluding contralateral breast cancers), the HR was 0.71 
(95% CI = 0.53 to 0.94; stratiﬁ ed log rank  P  = .050). For dis-
ease-free survival, the HR was 0.81 (95% CI = 0.65 to 0.99; 
stratiﬁ ed log rank  P  = .078). There was no difference in overall 
survival comparing women receiving the dietary intervention 
with control group women (HR = 0.89; 95% CI = 0.65 to 1.21; 
stratiﬁ ed log rank  P  = .56). Based on the effects on the pri -
mary endpoint, 38 women would need to adopt a lifestyle inter-
vention  reducing  dietary  fat  intake  to  prevent  one  additional 
breast cancer recurrence.             

 Dietary  intervention  effects  were  examined  based  on  BMI, 
hormone  receptor,  and  nodal  status  in  subgroup  analyses  by 
using  adjusted  Cox  model. A  total  of  eight  subgroup  analyses 
were performed, and none of the interactions tested were statisti-
cally signiﬁ cant. However, the dietary intervention had a greater 
effect  on  relapse-free  survival  in  women  with  ER-negative 

1770  ARTICLES 

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

  Table 1.        Characteristics of participants at baseline by intervention group *   

Characteristic

 Unknown

 <26
 26 – 29

 None
 Some
 Unknown

 Never
 Past
 Current
 Unknown

 Less than high school
 More than high school
 College degree
 Graduate school
 Unknown

 White
 Black
 Hispanics
 Asian or Paciﬁ c Islander
 American Indian
 Unknown

Age (y), mean (95% CI)
Race or ethnic group, No. (%)
   
   
   
   
   
   
Education, No. (%)
   
   
   
   
   
Current alcohol use, No. (%)
   
   
   
Smoking status, No. (%)
   
   
   
   
BMI (kg/m 2 ), No. (%)
   
   
    ≥ 30
   
Waist circumference (cm)
   
   
   
   
Diabetes, No. (%)
   
   
   
Daily dietary intake  †  
   
   
   
First degree family history of breast 
 
   
   
   
Prior bilateral 
 
   
   
   
Prior menopausal 
 
   
   
   

  hormone therapy, No. (%)
 None
 Yes
 Unknown

  oophorectomy, No. (%)
 Yes
 No
 Unknown

 Kcal, mean (SD)
 Fat (g/d), mean (SD)
 Fat, % of caloric intake (SD)

  cancer, No. (%)
 No
 Yes
 Unknown

 Mean (SD)
 ≤88, No. (%)
 >88, No. (%)
 Unknown

 Yes
 No
 Unknown

Dietary intervention 

(N = 975)

Control 
(N = 1462)

58.6 (44.4 to 72.8)

58.5 (43.6 to 73.4)

826 (84.7)
52 (5.3)
37 (3.8)
58 (4.0)
1 (0.1)
1 (0.1)

21 (2.6)
326 (33.6)
232 (23.9)
236 (24.4)
160

292 (30.1)
677 (69.9)

6

483 (49.9)
428 (44.2)
57 (5.9)
7

440 (46.0)
256 (26.8)
261 (27.3)
18

87.36 (14.2)
562 (59.7)
379 (40.3)
34

28 (5.4)
512 (94.6)
435

1667.3 (500.6)
57.62 (24.4)
29.61 (7.1)

722 (74.2)
251 (25.8)

2
963

153 (15.9)
801 (83.1)
21
969

332 (34.3)
633 (65.3)
10 

1235 (84.5)
75 (5.1)
58 (4.0)
86 (5.9)
2 (0.1)
6 (0.3)

39 (2.7)
452 (31.0)
394 (27.1)
334 (23.0)
243

452 (31.1)
1002 (68.9)

8

708 (48.7)
641 (44.1)
105 (7.2)

8

664 (46.6)
383 (26.9)
377 (26.5)
38
1

87.12 (14.0)
819 (57.9)
596 (42.1)
47

40 (4.8)
787 (95.2)
635

1659 (417.0)
56.33 (23.2)
29.60 (6.7)

1083 (74.2)
377 (25.8)

2
1447

208 (14.4)
1229 (84.9)

25
1455

516 (35.5)
931 (64.0)
15 

  *  With the exception of the race or ethnic group category, percentages are given 
relative to participants with known values for each characteristic. Differences in 
baseline variables between groups were analyzed using  t  tests, paired  t  tests, or 
the appropriate tests with categorical variables. None of the comparisons between 
intervention  groups  were  statistically  signiﬁ cant  at  the  two-sided   P <.05  level. 
CI = conﬁ dence interval; BMI = body mass index; SD = standard deviation.  

   †   Information on dietary intake was available for all 975 intervention group 

participants and 1461 control women.  

cancer (HR = 0.58; 95% CI = 0.37 to 0.91) than in women with 
ER-positive disease (HR = 0.85; 95% CI = 0.63 to 1.14); inter-
action test,  P  = .15 (Fig. 3). Findings by PgR status were similar 
( Table 5 ).       

  Table 2.        Characteristics of breast cancers and breast cancer therapy by 
intervention group *   

Characteristic

Dietary intervention 

(N = 975)

Control 
(N = 1462)

 Positive
 Negative

 I
 II A
 II B
 III A

 Positive
 Negative
 Borderline
 Unknown

 Inﬁ ltrating ductal (only)
 Inﬁ ltrating lobular (+/ −  other)
 Other

 Mean No. positive (SD)
 Negative, No. (%)
 1 – 3 positive nodes, No. (%)
 >3 positive nodes, No. (%)
 Unknown

Histologic type, No. (%)
   
   
   
Tumor size (cm)
 Mean (SD)
   
 <0.5, No. (%)
   
 >0.5 – 1, No. (%)
   
 >1 – 2, No. (%)
   
 >2 – 5, No. (%)
   
   
 >5, No. (%)
Nodal Status
   
   
   
   
   
Stage
   
   
   
   
ER status, No. (%)
   
   
PgR status, No. (%)
   
   
   
   
Type of surgery, No. (%)
   
   
   
Radiation therapy, No. (%)
   
   
   
Type of nodal evaluation, No. (%)
   
 
   
 
   
Systemic therapy, No. (%)
   
   
   
Chemotherapy regimens, 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
  Adriamycin – cyclophosphamide 
 

  No. (%)  ‡  
 Adriamycin –
 
 Cyclophosphamide – 
  methotrexate – 5-ﬂ uorouracil
 5-Fluorouracil – adriamycin –
 
 cyclophosphamide/
  cyclophosphamide – 
  adriamycin – 5-ﬂ uorouracil

 Axillary dissection/sampling, 
  No. (%)
 Sentinel node procedure, 
  No. (%)
 No lymph node dissection

 Tamoxifen alone
 Tamoxifen plus chemotherapy
 Chemotherapy alone

 Mastectomy
 Breast conserving
 Unknown

 cyclophosphamide, No. (%)

 Yes
 No
 Unknown

 →  paclitaxel

 

842 (86.4)
98 (10.1)
35 (3.6)

1.93 (0.9)
2 (0.2)
108 (11.1)
573 (58.8)
284 (29.1)
8 (0.8)

2.02 (1.5)
708 (73.1)
230 (23.8)
30 (3.1)
7

531 (54.5)
312 (32.0)
102 (10.5)
30 (3.1)

770 (79.0)
205 (21.0)

641 (69.6)
268 (29.1)
12 (1.3)
54

343 (35.5)  †  
624 (64.5)

8

659 (68.7)
300 (31.3)
16

918 (94.8)

50 (5.2)

7

465 (47.7)
375 (38.5)
135 (13.9)
505

169 (33.5)

269 (53.5)

35 (7.0)

1277 (87.4)
125 (8.6)
60 (4.0)

1.89 (0.9)
7 (0.5)
153 (10.5)
871 (59.6)
422 (28.9)
9 (0.6)

2.02 (1.6)
1060 (72.9)
338 (23.3)
56 (3.8)
8

797 (54.5)
467 (31.9)
140 (9.6)
58 (4.0)

1189 (81.3)
273 (18.7)

960 (69.4)
414 (29.9)
9 (0.7)
79

434 (29.9)
1018 (70.1)

10

1019 (70.5)
427 (29.5)
16

1361 (93.6)

93 (6.4)

8

693 (47.4)
555 (38.0)
214 (14.6)
763

243 (31.9)

410 (53.7)

53 (7.0)

32 (6.3)

57 (7.5)

  *  Percentages are given relative to participants with known values for each char-
acteristic.  Differences  in  breast  cancer  characteristics  and  breast  cancer  therapy 
were analyzed using  t  tests, paired  t  tests, or the appropriate test with categorical vari-
ables. All  P  values were two-sided. ER = estrogen receptor; PgR = progesterone 
receptor; SD = standard deviation.   

   †   Statistically signiﬁ cant difference in the frequency of mastectomy versus breast-

conserving surgery in dietary intervention versus control subjects,  P  = .004.  

   ‡   Data on chemotherapy regimens were available for 505 of the 510 women in 
the dietary intervention group who had chemotherapy and 763 of the 769 women 
in the control group who had chemotherapy.  

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006 

ARTICLES  1771

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

5
4
0
0

  

=
 P

4

.
 

  

1
0
0
0
<

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

5
3
0
0

4

.
 

.

0
(
 

  

=
 P

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

2
0
0
0

.

2

 

o
t
 

.
 

6

1
0
0
0
 <
 P

.

 1
 −
(
 

  

=
 P

 
,
)
1
1
 1
 −
o
t
 

 

3
2
 2
 −
(
 

7
6
 1
 −

 
,
)
0
0
 1
 −
o
t
 

 

4
8
 1
 −
(
 

2
4
 1
 −

 
,
)
3
 3
 −
o
t
 
9

 

.

1
 7
 −

)
6
5
5
1

 

o
t
 

6
0
5
1
(
 

1
3
5
1

)
7
8
4
1

 

o
t
 

3
3
4
1
(
 

0
6
4
1

)
4
8
6
1

 

o
t
 

5
3
6
1
(
 

0
6
6
1

)
9
1
7
1

 

o
t
 

6
5
6
1
(
 

7
8
6
1

 
,
)
4

.

2

 

o
t
 

.

0
(
 

4

.

2

 
,
)
0

.

2

 

o
t
 

2

.

1

 
,
)
9

.

1
(
 

2

.

2

)
7

.

7
1

 

o
t
 

9

.

6
1
(
 

3

.

7
1

)
1

.

0
2

 

o
t
 

9

.

8
1
(
 

5

.

9
1

)
3

.

8
1

 

o
t
 

6

.

7
1
(
 

0

.

8
1

)
9

.

8
1

 

o
t
 

0

.

8
1
(
 

4

.

8
1

 

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 

y
r
a
t
e
i
D

5

 
r
a
e
y

 
t
a
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
s
u
n
i
m

 

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 

y
r
a
t
e
i
D

3

 
r
a
e
y

 
t
a
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
s
u
n
i
m

 

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 

y
r
a
t
e
i
D

1

 
r
a
e
y
 
t
a
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
s
u
n
i
m

1

 
r
a
e
y

 
t

  A

e
n
i
l
e
s
a
  B

l
o
r
t
n
o
C

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 

y
r
a
t
e
i
D

l
o
r
t
n
o
C

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 

y
r
a
t
e
i
D

e
l
b
a
i
r
a
V

   

 *
p
u
o
r
g

 

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 

y
b

 
,

y
l
t
n
e
u
q
e
s
b
u
s
 

d
n
a
 
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b

 
t
a
 
a
t
a
d

 
c
i
r
t
e
m
o
p
o
r
h
t
n
a
 

d
n
a
 
s
e
k
a
t
n
i
 
t
n
e
i
r
t
u
n

 
f
o

 
  )
s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n
i
 
e
c
n
e
d
ﬁ 
n
o
c
 
%
5
9

 

h
t
i

w

(
 
s
e
u
l
a
v

 

n
a
e

    M

   
.

3

 
e
l
b
a
  T

 
,
)
0

.

6
 1
 −
o
t
 
1

 

.

2
 2
 −
(
 
0

.

9
 1
 −

 
,
)
5

.

7
 1
 −
o
t
 
9

 

.

1
 2
 −
(
 
7

.

9
 1
 −

 
,
)
1

.

6
 1
 −
o
t
 
9

 

.

9
 1
 −
(
 
0
.

8
 1
 −

)
7

.

2
5

 

o
t
 

0

.

0
5
(
 

3

.

1
5

)
5

.

4
3

 

o
t
 

2

.

2
3
(
 

3

.

3
3

)
5

.

7
5

 

o
t
 

1

.

5
5
(
 

3

.

6
5

)
8

.

8
5

 

o
t
 

7

.

5
5
(
 

3

.

7
5

  

  †
e
k
a
t
n
i
 

y
r
a
t
e
i
d

 

y
l
i
a
D

)
g
(
 
t
a
f
 
l
a
t
o
 T

 
,
)
9

.

 6
 −
o
t
 

 

1

.

 9
 −
(
 

0

.

 8
 −

 
,
)
1

.

 8
 −
o
t
 

 

8

.

 9
 −
(
 

0

.

 9
 −

 
,
)
2

.

 

 8
 −
o
t
 
6

.

 9
 −
(
 

9

.

 8
 −

)
6

.

9
2

 

o
t
 

8

.

8
2
(
 

2

.

9
2

)
9

.

0
2

 

o
t
 

8

.

9
1
(
 

3

.

0
2

)
9

.

9
2

 

o
t
 

3

.

9
2
(
 

6

.

9
2

)
1

.

0
3

 

o
t
 

2

.

9
2
(
 

6

.

9
2

)
s
e
i
r
o
l
a
c
 
f
o
%

 

(
 
t
a
 F

 
,
)
5

.

 5
 −
o
t
 

 

8

.

 7
 −
(
 

6

.

 6
 −

 
,
)
9

.

 5
 −
o
t
 

 

5

.

 7
 −
(
 

7

.

 6
 −

 
,
)
5

.

 

 5
 −
o
t
 
9

.

 6
 −
(
 

2

.

 6
 −

)
1

.

7
1

 

o
t
 

1

.

6
1
(
 

6

.

6
1

)
9

.

0
1

 

o
t
 

0

.

0
1
(
 

4

.

0
1

)
0

.

9
1

 

o
t
 

1

.

8
1
(
 

5

.

8
1

)
3

.

9
1

 

o
t
 

1

.

8
1
(
 

7

.

8
1

)
g
(
 
t
a
f
 

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
 S

 
,
)
9

.

 2
 −
o
t
 

 

4

.

 4
 −
(
 

7

.

 3
 −

 
,
)
7

.

 3
 −
o
t
 

 

4

.

 4
 −
(
 

9

.

 3
 −

 
,
)
0

.

 

 3
 −
o
t
 
9

.

 3
 −
(
 

5

.

 3
 −

)
1

.

1
1

 

o
t
 

4

.

0
1
(
 

8

.

0
1

)
6

.

7

 

o
t
 

0

.

7
(
 

3

.

7

)
2

.

2
1

 

o
t
 

6

.

1
1
(
 

9

.

1
1

)
5

.

2
1

 

o
t
 

8

.

1
1
(
 

2

.

2
1

)
g
(
 
t
a
f
 

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
n
u
y
l
o
 P

 
,
)
3

.

 6
 −
o
t
 

 

8

.

 8
 −
(
 

6

.

 7
 −

 
,
)
0

.

 7
 −
o
t
 

 

8

.

 8
 −
(
 

9

.

 7
 −

 
,
)
6

.

 

 6
 −
o
t
 
2

.

 8
 −
(
 

3

.

 7
 −

)
2

.

0
2

 

o
t
 

1

.

9
1
(
 

6

.

9
1

)
7

.

2
1

 

o
t
 

8

.

1
1
(
 

3

.

2
1

)
8

.

1
2

 

o
t
 

8

.

0
2
(
 

3

.

1
2

)
3

.

2
2

 

o
t
 

0

.

1
2
(
 

6

.

1
2

)
g
(
 
t
a
f
 

d
e
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
n
u
o
n
o
 M

)
4

)
9

.

.

 0
 −
o
t
 

 0
 −
o
t
 

 

 

9

5

.

.

 1
 −
(
 

 4
 −
(
 

1

7

.

.

 1
 −

 2
 −

)
2

.

)
2

.

 0
 −
o
t
 

 

1

.

 3
 −
(
 

8

.

 1
 −

 0
 −
o
t
 

 

3

.

 1
 −
(
 

7
7

.

 0
 −

)
3

)
0

.

.

 

 

 0
 −
o
t
 
3

 1
 −
o
t
 
6

.

.

 1
 −
(
 
8
.

 3
 −
(
 

3

.

 0
 −

 2
 −

)
9

)
7

.

.

7
2

3
7

 

 

o
t
 

o
t
 

3

0

.

.

7
2
(
 

2
7
(
 

6

8

.

.

7
2

2
7

)
2

)
6

.

.

7
2

1
7

 

 

o
t
 

o
t
 

4

6

.

.

6
2
(
 

9
6
(
 

8

6

.

.

6
2

0
7

)
8

)
4

.

.

7
2

3
7

 

 

o
t
 

o
t
 

2

8

.

.

7
2
(
 

1
7
(
 

5

6

.

.

7
2

2
7

)
0

)
7

.

.

8
2

3
7

 

 

o
t
 

o
t
 

2

7

.

.

7
2
(
 

1
7
(
 

.

6
7
2

7

.

2
7

 
e
r
e
w
 
s
t
s
e
t
 
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
 
l
l

A

 
.
s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

 
l
a
c
i
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 

h
t
i

w

 
t
s
e
t
 
e
t
a
i
r
p
o
r
p
p
a
 
e
h
t
 
r
o

 
,
s
t
s
e
t
  
 t
 

d
e
r
i
a
p

 
,
s
t
s
e
t
  
 t
 

g
n
i
s
u

 

 

d
e
z
y
l
a
n
a
 
e
r
e
w
y
p
a
r
e
h
t
 
r
e
c
n
a
c
 
t
s
a
e
r
b

 

d
n
a
 
s
c
i
t
s
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
 
r
e
c
n
a
c
 
t
s
a
e
r
b

 

n
i
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D

 
.

x
e
d
n
i
 
s
s
a
m
y
d
o
b

 

 

=

 
I

M
  B
  *

 

d
n
a
 
4
5
6
 
r
o
f
 
;
1
 
r
a
e
y
 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

 

 

n
e
m
o
w
8
2
3
1
d
n
a
 
0
4
8
 
r
o
f
 
;
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b
 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

 

p
u
o
r
g
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
e
h
t
 
d
n
a
 
p
u
o
r
g
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 
y
r
a
t
e
i
d
 
e
h
t
 
n
i
 
n
e
m
o
w

 

 

 
f
o
1
6
4
1
d
n
a
 
5
7
9
 
r
o
f
 
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
 
s
a
w
 
e
k
a
t
n
i
 
y
r
a
t
e
i
d
n
o
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
   I
   †

 

 

 
,

 

 

n
e
m
o
w
1
8
9
d
n
a
 
0
0
6
 
r
o
f
 
;
1
 
r
a
e
y
 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

 

 

n
e
m
o
w
0
3
2
1
d
n
a
 
5
5
7
 
r
o
f
 
;
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b
 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

 

p
u
o
r
g
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
e
h
t
 
d
n
a
 
p
u
o
r
g
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 
y
r
a
t
e
i
d
 
e
h
t
 
n
i
 
n
e
m
o
w

 

 

 
f
o
4
2
4
1
d
n
a
 
7
5
9
 
r
o
f
 
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
 
s
a
w

 
I

 

 

M
B
n
o
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
   I
   ‡

  
.

5

 
r
a
e
y
 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

n
e
m
o
w
8
4
6

 

 

d
n
a
 

0
8
3

 
r
o
f
 

d
n
a
 
;
3

 
r
a
e
y

 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

n
e
m
o
w
7
7
0
1

 

 

4
4
0
1

 

d
n
a
 

8
9
6

 
r
o
f
 
;
1

 
r
a
e
y

 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

n
e
m
o
w
0
1
3
1

 

 

d
n
a
 

4
5
8

 
r
o
f
 
;
e
n
i
l
e
s
a
b

 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

p
u
o
r
g

 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
e
h
t
 

d
n
a
 

p
u
o
r
g

 

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
 

y
r
a
t
e
i
d

 
e
h
t
 

n
i
 

n
e
m
o
w
2
6
4
1

 

 

d
n
a
 

5
7
9

 
l
l
a
 
r
o
f
 
e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
 
s
a
w

 
t
h
g
i
e
w
n
o

 

 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
  I
  §

  
.

5

 
r
a
e
y

 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

n
e
m
o
w
8
9
9

 

 

d
n
a
 

6
8
3

 
r
o
f
 

d
n
a
 
;
3

 
r
a
e
y

 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

n
e
m
o
w

  
.

5

 
r
a
e
y

 
t
a
 
,
y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r
 
,

n
e
m
o
w
4
3
5

 

 

d
n
a
 

3
1
3

 
r
o
f
 

d
n
a
 
;
3

 
r
a
e
y
 
t
a
 
,

y
l
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r

s
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
c
i
h
p
r
o
m
o
p
o
r
h
t
n
A

  

  ‡
 )
 2

m
/
g
k
(
 
I

M
 B

 

 §
)
g
k
(
 
t
h
g
i
e

 W

)
l
a
c
k
(
 

y
g
r
e
n
 E

)
d
/
g
(
 
r
e
b
i
 F

  
.

d
e
d
i
s
-
o
w

t

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

   

1772  ARTICLES 

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

  Table 4.        Endpoints, including breast cancer recurrences, by intervention group  

Events

Dietary intervention 

(n = 975)

Control 
(n = 1462)

A

 
s
t
n
e
v
E

 
l

i

 

a
v
v
r
u
S
e
e
r
F
-
e
s
p
a
e
R
h

 

l

t
i

W
%

 

  breast), No. (%)

  with lumpectomy, No. (%)

 Local recurrence, No. (%)
 Regional recurrence, No. (%)
 Distant recurrence (except opposite 
 

Recurrence
   
   
   
 
Ipsilateral breast recurrence in patients 
 
New breast cancer in the contralateral 
 
Relapse-free survival events, total No. (%) * 
Second primary cancer (excludes opposite 
 
Death (without breast cancer recurrence), 
 
Disease-free survival events, total No. (%)  †  

  breast cancer), No. (%)

  breast, No. (%)

  No. (%)

3 (0.3)
6 (0.6)
52 (5.3)

11 (1.1)

24 (2.5)

96 (9.8)
28 (2.9)

15 (1.5)

8 (0.6)
12 (0.8)
93 (6.4)

31 (2.1)

37 (2.5)

181 (12.4)
50 (3.4)

19 (1.3)

139 (14.3)

250 (17.1)

  *  Relapse-free survival events include local, regional, and distant recurrence, 

ipsilateral breast recurrence after lumpectomy, and contralateral breast cancer.  

   †   Disease-free survival events include those for relapse-free survival and also 
include any secondary invasive cancer, excluding basal and squamous skin can-
cer, and death without breast cancer recurrence.  

  D ISCUSSION  

 WINS is, to our knowledge, the ﬁ rst large-scale randomized 
trial to test whether a dietary intervention can improve the clinical 
outcome of women with breast cancer. The WINS results indi-
cate that a lifestyle intervention designed to reduce dietary fat 
intake  can  be  successfully  implemented  in  women  with  early-
stage, resected breast cancer receiving conventional cancer man-
agement in a multicenter clinical trial setting. After approximately 
5 years of follow-up, women in the dietary intervention group 
had a 24% lower risk of relapse than those in the control group 
(HR  =  0.76;  95%  CI  =  0.60  to  0.98).  Although  these  results 
are suggestive of beneﬁ t for the dietary intervention, given the 
level of statistical signiﬁ cance ( P  = .034 for adjusted Cox model 
 analysis),  the  higher  relapse-free  survival  seen  in  the  dietary 
group could also be a result of chance. 

Diet
96/975

Control
181/1462

HR
0.76

95% CI

0.60 to 0.98

P-value*

.034 

Control
Diet

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.0

 
s
t
n
e
v
E

i

 
l
a
v
v
r
u
S
 
e
e
r
F
-
e
s
p
a
e
R
 
h
t
i

l

W
%

 

0

1

2

3

Years

Diet
Control

975
1462

949
1416

907
1352

807
1197

4

647
965

5

490
756

6

342
529

7

201
326

     Fig. 2.     Kaplan – Meier estimates of relapse-free survival. Number of events/number 
of patients in the dietary intervention and control groups are indicated. Hazard 
ratio (HR) and 95% conﬁ dence interval (CI) were calculated from adjusted Cox 
proportional hazard model comparisons of control to dietary intervention groups 
through the 60-month median follow-up period.  P  value is two-sided. Numbers 
of patients at risk are indicated below the graph.     

Diet
68/770

Control
122/1189

HR
0.85

95% CI

0.63 to 1.14

P value

.277

Control
Diet

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.0

0

1

2

3

4

Years

Diet 
Control

770
1189

753
1165

725
1122

641
995

512
802

5

385
613

6

265
440

7

156
270

B

 
s
t
n
e
v
E

 
l

i

 

a
v
v
r
u
S
e
e
r
F
-
e
s
p
a
e
R
 
h
t
i

l

Diet
28/205 

Control
59/273

HR
0.58

95% CI

0.37 to 0.91

P value

.018

Control
Diet

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.0

W
%

 

Diet
Control

0

205
273

1

196
205

2

182
230

3

4

Years

166
203

135
163

5

105
133

6

77
88

7

45
55

   Fig. 3.     Kaplan – Meier estimates of relapse-free survival. ( A ) Estrogen receptor –
 positive  subjects.  ( B )  Estrogen  receptor – negative  subjects.  Number  of  events/
number of patients in the dietary intervention and control groups are indicated. 
Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% conﬁ dence intervals (CIs) were calculated from 
adjusted  Cox  proportional  hazard  model  comparisons  of  control  to  dietary 
intervention groups through the 60-month median follow-up period.  P  values are 
two-sided. Numbers of patients at risk are indicated below the graph.     

 Secondary analyses suggested a stronger effect for dietary fat 
reduction on breast cancer recurrence in women with hormone 
receptor – negative cancers compared with women whose cancers 
were  hormone  receptor  positive;  however,  the  interaction  be-
tween dietary intervention and hormone receptor status was not 
statistically signiﬁ cant. These ﬁ ndings are consistent with trends 
suggestive of a differential dietary inﬂ uence by hormone receptor 
status  on  breast  cancer  incidence  recently  described  in  the 
Women’s Health Initiative randomized primary prevention trial 
and in a Nurse’s Health Study cohort  ( 31 , 32 ) . A differential inﬂ u-
ence of dietary fat on breast cancer recurrence based on hormone 
 receptor  status  will  require  conﬁ rmation.  However,  some  of 
the most active adjuvant breast cancer interventions, including 
aromatase  inhibitors   ( 21  –  24 )   and  trastuzumab   ( 33  –  35 ) ,  are 
effective only in biologically deﬁ ned subgroups, and interactions 
have been observed between ER status and adjuvant chemother-
apy effect  ( 36 ) . Thus, it would not be surprising to ﬁ nd that a 
lifestyle  intervention  has  an  effect  on  only  some  categories  of 
breast cancer. 

 Because ER-positive cancers are under estrogen inﬂ uence, a 
predominant inﬂ uence of diet on ER-negative cancers would im-
plicate factors other than estrogen  ( 37 , 38 )  as mediators. Other 
potential  mechanisms  include  reduced  insulin  levels   ( 39 , 40 ) , 
reduced  insulin  resistance   ( 41 ) ,  reduced  insulin-like  growth 

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006 

ARTICLES  1773

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

  Table 5.        Relapse-free survival, by baseline characteristics and intervention group *   

Variable

Dietary intervention

Control

HR (95% CI)

  Relapse events/total N

 Positive
 Negative

BMI  †  
 <25
   
 25 – 30
   
   
 >30
Axillary lymph nodes  ‡  
   
   
ER § 
   
   
PgR  ||  
   
   
Receptor subgroups  ||  
   
   
   
   

 ER+, PgR+
 ER+, PgR − 
 ER − , PgR+
 ER − , PgR − 

 Positive
 Negative

 Positive
 Negative

33/371
33/325
29/261

40/258
56/710

68/770
28/205

55/641
28/268

49/598
12/121
6/43
16/147

55/563
62/484
61/377

0.83 (0.54 to 1.27)
0.77 (0.51 to 1.18)
0.66 (0.42 to 1.04)

72/392
109/1062

0.83 (0.57 to 1.21)
0.77 (0.56 to 1.07)

122/1189
59/273

0.85 (0.63 to 1.14)
0.58 (0.37 to 0.91)

97/960
75/414

90/921
27/199
7/39
48/215

0.83 (0.59 to 1.15)
0.54 (0.35 to 0.83)

0.83 (0.58 to 1.17)
0.73 (0.37 to 1.46)
0.57 (0.17 to 1.87)
0.44 (0.25 to 0.77)

  *  HR  =  hazard  ratio;  CI  =  conﬁ dence  interval;  BMI  =  body  mass  index; 

ER = estrogen receptor; PgR = progesterone receptor.  

   †   BMI  =  weight  in  kg/(height  in  m) 2 .  Adjusted  for  nodal  status  (positive  or 
negative),  systemic  adjuvant  therapy  (chemotherapy  alone,  tamoxifen  alone, 
or chemotherapy plus tamoxifen), ER status (positive or negative), tumor size 
(<2 or  ≥ 2 cm), and mastectomy (yes or no); excludes 56 women without baseline 
body weight measurements.  

   ‡   Adjusted for systemic adjuvant therapy, ER status, tumor size, and mastec-

tomy; excludes 15 women with no axillary node dissection.  

  §  Adjusted for systemic adjuvant therapy, nodal status, tumor size, and mas-

tectomy.  

   ||   Excludes  154  patients  with  no  PgR  information  or  who  were  classiﬁ ed  as 
borderline PgR by their local laboratory; adjusted for systemic adjuvant therapy, 
nodal status, tumor size, and mastectomy.  

factor 1  ( 42 , 43 ) , or reduced inﬂ ammation markers — all factors 
that may be inﬂ uenced by dietary fat decrease and/or weight loss 
 ( 44 , 45 ) . Planned analyses of serial fasting blood samples in the 
two groups will address these issues. 

 The most appropriate endpoint for breast cancer adjuvant tri-
als is controversial, and even the deﬁ nitions of these endpoints 
are  inconsistent   ( 46 ) .  Endpoints  from  recent  selected  adjuvant 
therapy trials are compared to the relapse-free survival endpoint 
of the WINS trial in  Table 6 . Collectively, these reports deﬁ ne 
the  endpoint  of   “ disease-free  survival ”   in  four  different  ways 
 ( 21  –  24 , 27 ) . We deﬁ ned relapse-free survival, the prospectively 
identiﬁ ed primary study endpoint in WINS, in the same way that 
Goss et al.  ( 22 )  recently deﬁ ned a disease-free survival endpoint. 

To facilitate comparison of our study with others, we included 
death without breast cancer recurrence and second primary can-
cers  as  events  in  additional  analyses;  all  results  led  to  similar 
conclusions  regarding  the  effects  of  the  dietary  intervention. 
Establishment of a common terminology for breast cancer adju-
vant trial endpoints should be a future priority of the research 
community.     

 This study has several potential limitations. One is the imbal-
ance  of  surgical  treatments  between  the  groups:  5.6%  more 
women in the control group than in the intervention group had 
breast-conserving  therapy. As  a  result,  55  more  women  in  the 
control group with  such surgery were at risk for an ipsilateral 
recurrence. However, considering all 1018 control group women 
with breast-conserving surgery, only 2.1% experienced ipsilat-
eral  recurrence.  Consequently,  only  about  one  additional  in-
breast  recurrence  would  be  anticipated  based  on  the  surgical 
distribution. Thus, the modest imbalance in surgical management 
is unlikely to explain the difference in clinical outcome that we 
observed.  In  addition,  in  a  large  National  Surgical  Adjuvant 
Breast  and  Bowel  Project  Cancer  randomized  trial  comparing 
mastectomy with lumpectomy plus radiation, women with mas-
tectomy had a similar rate of local and regional recurrences after 
approximately 5 years of follow-up, even when ipsilateral breast 
recurrences were included (45 such recurrences were seen in the 
mastectomy  group  compared  with  43  in  the  lumpectomy  plus 
 radiation group)  ( 47 ) . Moreover, our adjustment for surgery type 
(mastectomy versus lumpectomy) in the Cox proportional haz-
ards models should have controlled for the effect of the differ-
ences in surgical management. 

 A  second  limitation  of  the  study  is  its  reliance  on  self-
report of dietary intake because no validated  “ gold standard ”  
exists  for  assessing  dietary  fat  intake   ( 48 ) .  However,  body 
weight  was  statistically  signiﬁ cantly  lower  in  the  dietary 
group,  providing  biologic  plausibility  that  a  dietary  change 
did occur in women on the low-fat eating plan. Although the 
dietary intervention focused on reducing fat intake, intake of 
other nutrients changed, as did body weight. Thus, it is possi-
ble  that  weight  change   ( 49 , 50 )   and/or  dietary  factors  other 
than fat intake inﬂ uenced the breast cancer outcome. Planned 
future analyses will examine time trends and associations of 
changes in body weight and other dietary factors with breast 
cancer recurrence. 

 Study strengths include the randomized study design, closely 
comparable  anticancer  systemic  therapies  provided  to  women 
in  the  two  randomization  groups,  and  the  degree  of  dietary 
 adherence  achieved  by  study  participants.  The  reduction  in 

  Table 6.        Primary study endpoints in selected adjuvant therapy trials in early breast cancer *   

Endpoint: as deﬁ ned 
in each trial
Relapse-free survival
Disease-free survival
Disease-free survival
Recurrence-free survival
Disease-free survival
Disease-free survival

Group/trial†

WINS
MA-17
IES
ATAC
NSABP
BIG 1-98

Local – regional 

recurrence

Distant 
recurrence

Ipsilateral breast 
tumor recurrence  ‡  

Contralateral 
breast cancer

Death without 

recurrence

New primary 

cancer

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
O
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

O
O
X
X
X
X

O
O
O
O
X
X

  *  An  “ X ”  indicates the endpoint was included in the deﬁ nition, an  “ O ”  indicates the endpoint was not included in the deﬁ nition.  
   †   WINS = Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study; MA-17 = Mammary Study-17  ( 22 ) ; IES = International Exemestane Study  ( 23 ) ; ATAC = Anastrozole, Tamoxifen 

Alone, and Combined  ( 21 ) ; NSABP = National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project  ( 15 , 27 ) ; BIG 1-98 = Breast International Group  ( 24 ) .  

   ‡   Among patients with lumpectomy.  

1774  ARTICLES 

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

 dietary fat intake seen in the WINS trial is similar to or greater 
than  that  reported  in  other  trials  evaluating  breast  cancer  and 
diet associations either for primary prevention  ( 31 , 51 )  or recur-
rence  ( 52 ) . 

 Replication in clinical practice of this dietary intervention will 
likely  require  on-going  counseling  with  a  dietician  trained  in 
these techniques. The WINS low-fat eating plan was intensive, 
individualized, and delivered using a standardized protocol by 
registered dieticians who had received centralized training which 
included motivational interviewing techniques. 

 In summary, an interim efﬁ cacy analysis suggests that a life-
style intervention reducing dietary fat intake with modest body 
weight loss may improve the relapse-free survival of postmeno-
pausal  breast  cancer  patients.  Ongoing  follow-up  will  address 
original protocol design plans calling for 3 years of follow-up 
after completion of recruitment.    

  REFERENCES 

    (1)    Wynder EL, Cohen LA, Muscat JE, Winters B, Dwyer JT, Blackburn G. 
Breast cancer: weighing the evidence for a promoting role of dietary fat. 
 J Natl Cancer Inst   1997 ; 89 : 766  – 75.  

    (2)    Prentice RL. Future possibilities in the prevention of breast cancer: fat and 

ﬁ ber and breast cancer research.  Breast Cancer Res   2000 ; 2 : 268  – 76.  

    (3)    Willett  WC,  Stampfer  MJ,  Colditz  GA,  Rosner  BA,  Hennekens  CH, 
Speizer FE. Dietary fat and the risk of breast cancer.  N Engl J Med   1987 ; 316 :
 22  – 8.  

    (4)    Bingham SA, Luben R, Welch A, Wareham N, Khaw KT, Day N. Are im-
precise methods obscuring a relation between fat and breast cancer?  Lancet  
 2003 ; 362 : 212  – 4.  

    (5)    Boyd NF, Stone J, Vogt KN, Connelly BS, Martin LJ, Minkin S. Dietary fat 
and breast cancer risk revisited: a meta-analysis of the published literature. 
 Br J Cancer   2003 ; 89 : 1672  – 85.  

    (6)    Holmes MD, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Rosner B, Hunter DJ, Willett WC. 
Dietary factors and the survival of women with breast carcinoma [erratum 
in Cancer 1999;86:2707 – 8].  Cancer   1999 ; 86 : 826  – 35.  

    (7)    Goodwin  PJ, Ennis M, Pritchard KI, Koo J, Trudeau ME, Hood N. Diet 
and breast cancer: evidence that extremes in diet are associated with poor 
survival.  J Clin Oncol   2003 ; 21 : 2500  – 7.  

    (8)    Jain M, Miller AB, To T. Premorbid diet and the prognosis of women with 

breast cancer.  J Natl Cancer Inst   1994 ; 86 : 1390  – 7.  

    (9)    Zhang S, Folsom AR, Sellers TA, Kushi LH, Potter JD. Better breast cancer 
survival for postmenopausal women who are less overweight and eat less 
fat. The Iowa Women’s Health Study.  Cancer   1995 ; 76 : 275  – 83.  

   (10)    Saxe  GA,  Rock  CL,  Wicha  MS,  Schottenfeld  D.  Diet  and  risk  for 
breast  cancer  recurrence  and  survival.   Breast  Cancer  Res Treat    1999 ; 53 :
 241  – 53.  

   (11)    Prentice  RL.  Methodologic  challenges  in  chronic  disease  population  re-

search.  Biostatistics   2001 ; 2 : 365  – 81.  

   (12)    Freedman  LS,  Potischman  N,  Kipnis  V,  Midthune  D,  Schatzkin  A, 
Thompson FE, et al. A comparison of two dietary instruments for evaluating 
the fat-breast cancer relationship. Int J Epidemol  2006 ;35:1011–21.  

   (13)    Chlebowski  RT,  Rose  D,  Buzzard  IM,  Blackburn  GL,  Insull  W  Jr, 
Grosvenor M, et al. Adjuvant dietary fat intake reduction in postmenopausal 
breast  cancer  patient  management.  The  Women’s  Intervention  Nutrition 
Study (WINS).  Breast Cancer Res Treat   1992 ; 20 : 73  – 84.  

   (14)    Chlebowski  RT,  Blackburn  GL,  Buzzard  IM,  Rose  DP,  Martino  S, 
Khaddekar JD, et al. Adherence to a dietary fat intake reduction program 
in postmenopausal women receiving therapy for early breast cancer. The 
Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study.  J Clin Oncol   1993 ; 11 : 2072  – 80.  

   (15)    Fisher  B, Anderson  S,  Tan-Chiu  E,  Wolmark  N,  Wickerham  DL,  Fisher 
ER, et al. Tamoxifen and chemotherapy for axilary node-negative, estrogen 
receptor-negative breast cancer: ﬁ ndings from National Surgical Adjuvant 
Breast and Bowel Project B-23.  J Clin Oncol   2001 ; 19 : 931  – 42.  

   (16)    Buzdar AU, Kau SW, Smith TL, Hortobagyi GN. Ten-year results of FAC 
adjuvant  chemotherapy  trial  in  breast  cancer.  Am  J  Clin  Oncol    1989 ; 12 : 
123  – 8.  

   (17)    Henderson  IC,  Berry  DA,  Demetri  GD,  Cirrincione  CT,  Goldstein  LJ, 
Martino S, et al. Improved outcomes from adding sequential paclitaxel but 
not  from  escalating  doxorubicin  dose  in  an  adjuvant  chemotherapy  regi-
men  for  patients  with  node-positive  primary  breast  cancer.   J  Clin  Oncol  
 2003 ; 21 : 976  – 83.  

   (18)    Winters  BL,  Mitchell  DC,  Smiciklas-Wright  H,  Grosvenor  MB,  Liu  W, 
Blackburn  GL.  Dietary  patterns  in  women  treated  for  breast  cancer  who 
successfully reduce fat intake: the Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study 
(WINS).  J Am Diet Assoc   2004 ; 104 : 551  – 9.  

   (19)    Lohman TG, Roche AF, Martorell F, editors. Anthropometric standardiza-
tion reference manual. Champaign (IL): Human Kinetics Publishers, Inc; 
 1988 .  

   (20)    Copeland T, Grosvenor M, Mitchell DC, Smiciklas-Wright H, Marsobian 
V, Blackburn G, et al. Designing a quality assurance system for dietary data 
in a multicenter clinical trial: Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study.  J Am 
Diet Assoc   2000 ; 100 : 1186  – 90.  

   (21)    Baum M, Budzar AU, Cuzick J, Forbes J, Houghton JH, Klijn JG, et al. 
Anastrozole alone or in combination with tamoxifen versus tamoxifen alone 
for adjuvant treatment of postmenopausal women with early breast cancer: 
ﬁ rst results of the ATAC randomized trial.  Lancet   2002 ; 359 : 2131  – 9.  

   (22)    Goss  PE,  Ingle  JN,  Martino  S,  Robert  NJ,  Muss  HB,  Piccart  MJ,  et  al. 
A  randomized  trial  of  letrozole  in  postmenopausal  women  after  ﬁ ve 
years  of  tamoxifen  therapy  for  early-stage  breast  cancer.   N  Engl  J  Med  
 2003 ; 349 : 1793  – 802.  

   (23)    Coombes RC, Hall E, Gibson LJ, Paridaens R, Jassen J, Delozier T, et al. A 
randomized trial of exemestane after two to three years of tamoxifen ther-
apy in postmenopausal women with primary breast cancer.  N Engl J Med  
 2004 ; 350 : 1081  – 92.  

   (24)    Thurlimann B, Keshaviah A, Coates AS, Mouridsen H, Mauriac L, Forbes 
JF, et al.; The Breast International Group (BIG) 1-98 Collaborative Group. 
A comparison of letrozole and tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with 
early breast cancer.  N Engl J Med   2005 ; 353 : 2747  – 57.  

   (25)    Singletary SE, Allred C, Ashley P, Bassett LW, Berry D, Bland KI, et al. 
Revision of the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system for 
breast cancer.  J Clin Oncol   2002 ; 20 : 3628  – 36.  

   (26)    Chlebowski RT, Blackburn GL, Elashoff RE, Thomson C, Goodman MT, 
Shapiro  A,  et  al.  Dietary  fat  reduction  in  postmenopausal  women  with 
primary  breast  cancer:  Phase  III  Women’s  Intervention  Nutrition  Study 
(WINS).  Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol   2005 ; 24 :Abstract  10 .  

   (27)    Fisher  B,  Costantino  J,  Redmond  C,  Poisson  R,  Bowman  D,  Couture  J, 
et al. A randomized clinical trial evaluating tamoxifen in the treatment of 
patients  with  node-negative  breast  cancer  who  have  estrogen-receptor-
positive tumors.  N Engl J Med   1989 ; 320 : 479  – 84.  

   (28)    Fisher  B,  Redmond  C,  Legault-Poisson  S,  Dimitrov  NV,  Brown  AM, 
 Wickerham DL, et al. Postoperative chemotherapy and tamoxifen compared 
with tamoxifen alone in the treatment of positive-node breast cancer patients 
aged 50 years and older with tumors responsive to tamoxifen: results from 
the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project B-16.  J Clin Oncol  
 1990 ; 8 : 1005  – 18.  

   (29)    Lin D, Wei L, Ying, Z. Checking the Cox model with cumulative sums of 

martingale residuals.  Biometrika   1993 ; 80 : 557  – 72.  

   (30)    Haybitle JL. Repeated assessment of results in clinical trials of cancer treat-

ment.  Br J Radiol   1971 ; 44 : 793  – 7.  

   (31)    Prentice  RL,  Caan  B,  Chlebowski  RT,  Patterson  R,  Kuller  LH,  Ockene 
JK, et al. Low-fat dietary pattern and risk of invasive breast cancer. The 
Women’s Health Initiative randomized controlled dietary modiﬁ cation trial. 
 JAMA   2006 ; 295 : 629  – 42.  

   (32)    Fung TT, Hu FB, Holmes MD, Rosner BA, Hunter DJ, Colditz GA, et al. 
Dietary patterns and the risk of postmenopausal breast cancer.  Int J Cancer  
 2005 ; 116 : 116  – 21.  

   (33)    Salmon  DJ,  Leyland-Jones  B,  Shak  S,  Fuchs  H,  Paton V,  Bajamonde A, 
et al. Use of chemotherapy plus a monoclonal antibody against HER2 for 
metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses HER2.  N Engl J Med   2001 ; 344 :
 783  – 92.  

   (34)    Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J, Suman VJ, Geyer CE Jr, Davidson NE, 
et al. Trastuzumab plus adjuvant chemotherapy for operable HER2-positive 
breast cancer.  N Engl J Med   2005 ; 353 : 1673  – 84.  

   (35)    Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Procter M, Leyland-Jones B, Goldhirsch A, Untch M, 
Smith I, et al. Trastuzumab after adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2 positive 
breast cancer.  N Engl J Med   2005 ; 353 : 1659  – 72.  

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006 

ARTICLES  1775

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

   (36)   Berry  DA,  Cirrincione  C,  Henderson  IC,  Citron  ML,  Budman  DR, 
Goldstein  LJ,  et  al.  Estrogen-receptor  status  and  outcomes  of  modern 
chemotherapy  for  patients  with  node-positive  breast  cancer.   JAMA  
 2006 ; 295 : 1658  – 67.  

   (37)    Rose  DP,  Connolly  JM,  Chlebowski  RT,  Buzzard  IM,  Wynder  EL.  The 
effects  of  a  low-fat  dietary  intervention  and  tamoxifen  adjuvant  therapy 
on  the  serum  estrogen  and  sex  hormone-binding  globulin  concentra-
tions  of  postmenopausal  breast  cancer  patients.   Breast  Cancer  Res  Treat  
 1993 ; 27 : 253  – 62.  

   (38)    Wu  AH,  Pike  MC,  Stram  DO.  Meta-analysis:  dietary  fat  intake,  serum 
estrogen  levels,  and  the  risk  of  breast  cancer.   J  Natl  Cancer  Inst    1999 ; 91 :
 529  – 34.  

   (39)    Goodwin  PJ,  Ennis  M,  Pritchard  KI,  Trudeau  ME,  Koo  J,  Hartwick  W, 
et  al.  Fasting  insulin  and  outcome  in  early-stage  breast  cancer:  results 
of a prospective cohort study.  J Clin Oncol   2002 ; 20 : 42  – 51.  

   (40)    Borugian MJ, Sheps SB, Kim-Sing C, Van Patten C, Potter JD, Dunn B, 
et al. Insulin, macronutrient intake, and physical activity: are potential in-
dicators of insulin resistance associated with mortality from breast cancer? 
 Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev   2004 ; 13 : 1163  – 72.  

   (41)    Pollack MN, Chapman JW, Shepherd L, et al. Insulin resistance, estimated 
by serum C-peptide level, is associated with reduced event-free survival for 
postmenopausal women in NCIC CTG MA.14 adjuvant breast cancer trial. 
 Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol   2006 ; 24 : 524 .  

   (42)    Toniolo  P,  Bruning  PF,  Akhmedkhanov  A,  Bonfrer  JM,  Koenig  KL, 
 Lukanovia A, et al. Serum insulin-like growth factor-I and breast cancer. 
 Int J Cancer   2000 ; 88 : 828  – 32.  

   (43)    Wolf I, Sadetzki S, Catane R, Karasik A, Kaufman B. Diabetes mellitus and 

breast cancer.  Lancet   2005 ; 6 : 103  – 11.  

   (44)    Barnard RJ, Gonzalez JH, Liva ME, Ngo TH. Effects of a low-fat, high-ﬁ ber 
diet and exercise program on breast cancer risk factors in vivo and tumor 
cell growth and apoptosis in vitro.  Nutr Cancer   2006 ; 55 : 28  – 34.  

   (45)    Clifton  PM,  Keogh  JB,  Foster  PR,  Noakes  M.  Effect  of  weight  loss  on 
 inﬂ ammatory and endothelial markers and FMD using two low-fat diets. 
 Int J Obes (Lond)   2005 ; 29 : 1445  – 51.  

   (46)    Piccart-Gebhart M. New stars in the sky of treatment for early breast cancer. 

 N Engl J Med   2004 ; 350 : 1140  – 2.  

   (47)    Fisher B, Bauer M, Margolese R, Poisson R, Pilch Y, Redmond C, et al. Five 
year results of a randomized clinical trial comparing total mastectomy and 
segmental mastectomy with or without radiation in the treatment of breast 
cancer.  N Engl J Med   1985 ; 312 : 665  – 73.  

   (48)    Hunter  D.  Biochemical  indicators  of  dietary  intake.  In:  Willett  W,  editor. 
Nutritional  epidemiology.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press;   1998 . 
p. 174 – 243.  

   (49)    Chlebowski RT, Aiello E, McTiernan A. Weight loss in breast cancer patient 

management.  J Clin Oncol   2002 ; 20 : 1128  – 43.  

   (50)    Whiteman  MK,  Hillis  SD,  Curtis  KM,  McDonald  JA,  Wingo  PA, 
Marchbanks  PA.  Body  mass  and  mortality  after  breast  cancer  diagnosis. 
 Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev   2005 ; 14 : 2009  – 14.  

   (51)    Boyd  NF,  Greenberg  C,  Lockwood  G,  Little  L,  Martin  L,  Byng  J,  et  al. 
Effects  at  two  years  of  a  low-fat,  high-carbohydrate  diet  on  radiologic 
 features  of  the  breast:  results  from  a  randomized  trial.  Canadian  Diet 
and  Breast  Cancer  Prevention  Study  Group.   J  Natl  Cancer  Inst    1997 ; 89 : 
488  – 96.  

   (52)   Pierce JP, Faerber S, Wright FA, Rock CL, Newman V, Flatt SW, et al. 
for  the  Women’s  Healthy  Eating  and  Living  (WHEL)  Study  Group. 
A  randomized  trial  of  the  effect  of  a  plant-based  dietary  pattern  on 
additional  breast  cancer  events  and  survival:  the  Women’s  Healthy 
Eating  and  Living  (WHEL)  Study.   Control  Clin  Trials    2002 ; 23 :
 728  – 56.  

   NOTES  

   The following investigators were members of the WINS: Los Angeles Bio-
medical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center — R. T. Chlebowski, 
L. Lillington, M. Jackson; Institute for Cancer Prevention — E. L. Wynder  (de     -
ceased),  D.  W.  Nixon,  B.  Winters,  K.  Hoy,  J.  Richie;  Beth  Israel  Deaconess 
Medical  Center — G.  L.  Blackburn, T.  Copeland;  University  of  California  Los 
Angeles — R. Elashoff, T. Johnson, W. Liu, M. N. Brooks; John Wayne Cancer 
Institute — A.  Giuliano;  Cedars-Sinai  Medical  Center — P.  McAndrew;  Uni-
versity  of  California  Irvine  Clinical  Cancer  Center — J.  Butler;  University  of 
Hawaii — M.  Goodman;  Kaiser  Permanente  Medical  Group,  Oakland — B. 
Caan;  Nutrition  Information  Consultants — K.  Storch;  North  Shore  University 
Hos pital — V.  Vinciguerra;  Saint  Barnabas  Medical  Center — R.  Michaelson; 
Evanston Hospital, Kellogg Cancer Care Center — D. Merkel; Memorial-Sloan 
Kettering  Cancer  Center — C.  Hudis;  Lombardi  Cancer  Research  Center — 
C.  Issacs;  Rhode  Island  Hospital — M.  Winkler;  Wayne  State  University — 
M.  Simon;  University  of  Arizona — C.  Thomson;  Fred  Hutchinson  Cancer 
Research  Center — A.  Kristal;  Kaiser  Permanente  Center  for  Health  Research, 
Portland — K.  Karanja;  Ohio  State  University — W.  Farrar;  Medical  University 
of  South  Carolina — R.  Hall;  Duke  University — W.  Demark-Wahnefried;  Ben-
nett Cancer Center Hematology and Oncology — S. Del Prete; Geisinger Medical 
Center — A.  Bernath;  Park  Nicollet  Institute  Oncology  Research — A.  Shapiro; 
Medical College of  Wisconsin — G. Schectman; Christus Spohn Breast Care Pro-
gram — E.  Salloum; Good Samaritan Medical Center — E. McKeen; University of 
Miami — G. Shor-Posner; Midwestern Regional Medical Center — P. Vashi; Uni-
versity of Iowa — L. Snetselaar; Bay State Medical Center — G. Markari-Judson.  
  The  following  nutritionists  delivered  the  WINS  dietary  intervention:  N. 
 Adamowicz, L. Ahrens, S. Anderson, M. Beddome, R. Beller, K. Bierl, D. Brake, 
A.  Campa,  M.  Chrabaszewski,  C.  Coy,  S.  Dahlk,  F.  Ebel,  N.  Falla,  E.  Falk, 
S.  Anikstein  Feldman,  J.  Ferrares,  V.  Fortunato,  J.  Galicinao,  A.  Gallagher, 
P. Gregory, S. Heilman, W. Hirsch, M. Horan, P. Jensen, L. Kelleher, K.  Lombardi, 
M.  Lubin, A.  M.  Maggi,  M.  Malone,  S.  Marshall, V.  Marsoobian,  D.  Moran, 
K.  Mulligan,  E.  Nardi,  L.  Nylin,  J. T.  Papoutsakis,  J.  Pleuss,  K.  Radokovich, 
J. Reddan, C. Rheingruber, C. Richardson, J. Schenk, K. Schwab, S. Shannon, 
L. Shepard, S. Sloan, M. Sokil, D. Strong, A. Snyder, M. Vides, B. Whilden, 
C. Willeford, D. Wilson, L. Wolf, R. Zinaman.  

  The following investigators are members of the WINS Executive Committee: 
R. T. Chlebowski, Executive Committee Chair, Clinical Director and Principal 
Investigator; G. Blackburn, Chair, Nutrition Committee; R. Elashoff, Director, 
Statistical Coordinating Unit; and K. Hoy, National Coordinator. Former Ex ecu-
tive Committee chairs included E. L. Wynder (deceased) and D. W. Nixon.  

  The following investigators were members of the the WINS External Advi sory 
Committee: Sunnybrook Health Science Center — K. Pritchard, Chair; Mt Sinai 
Hospital — P.  Goodwin;  Tufts  University — J.  Dwyer;  University  of   Hawaii — 
L. Kolonel; Harvard University — W. Willett; and Cornell University — B. Turnbull.  
  The  following  investigators  were  members  of  the  Pathology  Committee: 
R.  Chlebowski,  Chair,  Los Angeles  Biomedical  Research  Institute  at  Harbor-
UCLA  Medical  Center;  M.  Sanchey,  Englewood  Hospital;  and  T.  Ahmed, 
New York Medical College.  

  This study was primarily funded by the National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes  of  Health,  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  Funding  for 
supplemental  projects  was  provided  by  the  Breast  Cancer  Research  Foundation 
and  the  American  Institute  for  Cancer  Research.  This  study  was  supported 
by an investigator-initiated RO1 grant. The WINS investigators (with input from 
the independent WINS External Advisory Committee) were solely responsible for 
the design; data collection, analysis, and interpretation; writing of the manuscript; 
and decision to submit for publication.   

  Manuscript  received  March  27,  2006  ;  revised  October  4,  2006     ;  accepted 

October 24, 2006.           

1776  ARTICLES 

Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 98, No. 24, December 20, 2006

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article-abstract/98/24/1767/2521940
by University of Ottawa user
on 11 June 2018

Carcinogenesis vol.30 no.8 pp.1402–1407, 2009
doi:10.1093/carcin/bgp130
Advance Access publication June 4, 2009

Effect of processed and red meat on endogenous nitrosation and DNA damage


Annemiek M.C.P.Joosen
M.Aspinall, Timothy M.Barrow, Emmanuelle
Lecommandeur, Amaya Azqueta1, Andrew R.Collins1 and
Sheila A.Bingham

, Gunter G.C.Kuhnle, Sue

MRC Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Hills
Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK and 1Department of Nutrition, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway
To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: þ44 1223 252 762;

Fax: þ44 1223 252 765;
Email: amj@mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk

Haem in red meat (RM) stimulates the endogenous production of
mutagenic nitroso compounds (NOC). Processed (nitrite-preserved
red) meat additionally contains high concentrations of preformed
NOC. In two studies, of a fresh RM versus a vegetarian (VEG) diet
(six males and six females) and of a nitrite-preserved red meat (PM)
versus a VEG diet (5 males and 11 females), we investigated
whether processing of meat might increase colorectal cancer risk
by stimulating nitrosation and DNA damage. Meat diets contained
420 g (males) or 366 g (females) meat/per day. Faecal homogenates
from day 10 onwards were analysed for haem and NOC and asso-
ciated supernatants for genotoxicity. Means are adjusted for differ-
ences in male to female ratios between studies. Faecal NOC
concentrations on VEG diets were low (2.6 and 3.5 mmol/g) but
signiﬁcantly higher on meat diets (PM 175 ± 19 nmol/g versus RM
185 ± 22 nmol/g; P 5 0.75). The RM diet resulted in a larger pro-
portion of nitrosyl iron (RM 78% versus PM 54%; P < 0.0001) and
less nitrosothiols (RM 12% versus PM 19%; P < 0.01) and other
NOC (RM 10% versus PM 27%; P < 0.0001). There was no statis-
tically signiﬁcant difference in DNA breaks induced by faecal water
(FW) following PM and RM diets (P 5 0.80). However, PM re-
sulted in higher levels of oxidized pyrimidines (P < 0.05). Surpris-
ingly, VEG diets resulted in signiﬁcantly more FW-induced DNA
strand breaks than the meat diets (P < 0.05), which needs to be
clariﬁed in further studies. Meats cured with nitrite have the same
effect as fresh RM on endogenous nitrosation but show increased
FW-induced oxidative DNA damage.

Introduction

Red and processed (nitrite-preserved red) meat (PM) increase the risk
of colorectal cancer with PM showing higher risk estimates per gram
of intake than red meat (RM) (1–3). Heterocyclic amines—known
carcinogens (4)—are formed during cooking of meat at high temper-
atures, but this is not speciﬁc for red and PM (5).

RM intake shows a dose–response relation with the endogenous
formation of nitroso compounds (NOC), whereas there is no such
relation for white meat (6,7). This is probably due to the abundant
presence of haem in RM (8,9), which can readily become nitrosylated
and act as a nitrosating agent (10). Recently, we conﬁrmed that nitro-
syl iron (FeNO) is the main contributor to high RM diet-induced

Abbreviations: CI, conﬁdence interval; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid;
EndoIII, endonuclease III; FW, faecal water; FeNO, nitrosyl iron; FPG, forma-
midopyrimidine; MTT, mean transit time; NOC, nitroso compounds; PM, pro-
cessed (nitrite-preserved red) meat; RM, red meat; RSNO, nitrosothiols; VEG,
vegetarian.

endogenous formation of NOC (11).
In addition, nitrosothiols
(RSNO) are rapidly formed from nitrite and thiol groups at low pH
in the stomach and can be precursors for the endogenous formation of
nitrosyl haem and other NOC, such as N- and O-NOC, in the small
and large bowel (11,12).

Many NOC are known carcinogens and the alkylation of DNA can
induce G to A transitions in genes mutated in colorectal cancer such as
ras (13). The NOC-speciﬁc DNA adduct O6-carboxymethyl-2#-
deoxy-guanosine increases in exfoliated colonic cells from volunteers
fed a high RM diet (14). O6-carboxymethyl-2#-deoxy-guanosine is
not repaired by O6-alkylguanine transferase in in vitro assays and
may at least partly explain the link between meat consumption and
colorectal cancer.

PM is a mixed category of meats that are preserved by a variety of
mechanical, chemical or enzymatic procedures. Different preserva-
tives, such as nitrite and nitrate in ham and sulphur dioxide in saus-
ages, may be used. Minced products such as hamburgers may or may
not be classiﬁed as PM. In most populations on which existing epi-
demiological ﬁndings are based, PM mainly consists of processed
RMs such as beef and pork (3,15).

Supplements of nitrate have been shown to increase faecal NOC
levels (16), but it is not clear whether preservation by this method
would result in an increased endogenous NOC production, and hence
explain some of the higher colorectal cancer risk with processed as
compared with RM. In two studies, of a fresh RM (beef and pork)
versus a vegetarian (VEG) diet—referred to as the RM study—and of
a nitrite-preserved red meat (bacon, ham, luncheon meat and corned
beef) versus a VEG diet—referred to as the PM study—we investi-
gated whether this form of processing might increase colorectal
cancer risk by stimulating nitrosation and DNA damage.

Methods

Subjects
Healthy males and females from Cambridgeshire were recruited through local
advertisements. Participants had to be between 20 and 85 years of age, non-
smokers, free from diabetes and bowel disease, not taking medication affecting
the gut for at least 3 months prior to the study, not pregnant and not partici-
pating in another biochemical intervention study at the same time. Prior to the
study, subjects were examined by a medical practitioner.

All subjects received verbal and written information and signed a written
consent form. The studies were approved by the Cambridge Local Research
Ethics Committee.

Sixteen volunteers were included in the PM study (5 males and 11 females);
12 volunteers participated in the RM study (six males and six females), which
has been described previously (14).

Study design
The studies had a randomized crossover design of a high meat versus a VEG
period: PM versus VEG in the PM study and RM versus VEG in the RM
study. Each dietary period lasted at least 14 days. Subjects lived in the
volunteer suite of the MRC Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, where all food
was provided and carefully controlled and all specimens could be collected
and processed immediately. Subjects followed their normal routine but were
only allowed to consume foods and drinks prepared by the diet techni-
cians. Body weights were monitored to ensure a constant weight through-
out. Faecal samples were collected and weighed daily and radio opaque
marker capsules were taken throughout to check compliance and for the
measurement of transit time (17). After subjects had consumed each diet
for 10 days, stools were collected on dry ice for analysis of NOC, haem
and genotoxicity.

Ó The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or display the open access version
of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that: the original authorship is properly and fully attributed; the Journal and Oxford University Press are
attributed as the original place of publication with the correct citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but
only in part or as a derivative work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

Study diets
All diets were provided as similar menus on a 3 day rotating schedule. Male
PM diets contained 420 g PM per day [given as 100 g bacon (days 1 and 2) or
pork luncheon meat (day 3) at lunch and 320 g corned beef (days 1 and 2) or
gammon (day 3) at dinner] and female PM diets contained 366 g PM per day
(given as 60 g bacon or pork luncheon meat at lunch and 306 g corned beef or
gammon at dinner). RM diets contained the same amount of meat, but lunch
was roast beef (days 1, 2 and 3) and dinner beef mince (days 1 and 3) or pork
(day 2). Over the course of the study, each volunteer consumed the same
amount of each type of meat.

Energy and macronutrient composition of the diets (Appendix) were
calculated using Data Into Nutrients for Epidemiological Research (DINER)
(18). Fat content of the diets was kept constant by exchanging protein for
carbohydrates. Energy requirements were estimated from body weight and
physical activity using standard equations for basal metabolic rate and esti-
mates of physical activity level (19). The energy intake of each participant was
matched to estimated energy requirement with 1 MJ standardized increments
(chocolate bar, shortbread or a combination of white bread, butter and mar-
malade) added to 8 MJ/day (female) or 10 MJ/day (males) basal diets.

Meat was not overcooked to minimize the formation of heterocyclic amines.
Puriﬁed water was given throughout for drinking and used for cooking and
low-nitrate vegetables were used to keep nitrate intake at constant low levels.
Tea, coffee and an aspartame-based sweetener were provided in the suite and
consumed freely, but subjects were asked to keep their intake constant during
the study.

Dietary and faecal NOC and haem
Duplicates for each daily diet were prepared. All foods consumed on 1 day
were prepared as normal, added together and diluted 1:2 in ultrapure water. The
mixture was homogenized with a food processor, snap frozen on dry ice and
stored at  20°C until analysis. Results are presented per gram of diet after
correction for dilution. For analysis of the separate nitrite-preserved red meats
consumed in the PM study, meats were cooked as normal and homogenized
and frozen separately as described above. Results are presented per gram of
cooked weight after correction for dilution.
For stool analysis, 40 g of frozen stool was thawed, diluted 1:5 in ultrapure
water and homogenized for 20 min in a stomacher (Colworth 3500, Seward
Medical, London, UK). The faecal homogenates were snap frozen on dry ice
and stored at  20°C until analysis. Results are presented per gram of faeces
after correction for dilution.

NOC were analysed using a modiﬁcation of the method previously used
(11), using an Ecomedics CLD 88 Exhalyzer (Ecomedics, Duernten, Switzer-
land). Approximately 100 ll of faecal homogenates or 500 ll of homogenized
diet or meat were weighed and incubated brieﬂy with 100 ll of an aqueous
solution of N-ethylmaleimide (50 mM) and diethylene triamine pentaacetic
acid (100 lM) to protect RSNO. Thereafter, 500 ll of a 5% (wt/vol) sulfamic
acid solution was added to remove nitrite and samples were injected into
a purge vessel kept at 60°C and ﬁlled with a standard tri-iodide reagent (20)
(38 mg I2 was added to a solution of 108 mg KI in 1 ml water; to this mixture,
13.5 ml glacial acetic acid was added) to determine total NOC. To determine
mercury(II) stable compounds, 100 ll 10 mM aqueous HgCl2 was added prior
to analysis; to determine mercury(II) and ferricyanide stable compounds, 100
ll each of 10 mM aqueous HgCl2 and 10 mM aqueous K3Fe(CN)6 solution
were added prior to analysis. RSNO were determined as the difference between
total NOC and mercury(II) stable NOC; FeNO was determined as difference
between mercury(II) stable NOC and mercury(II) and K3Fe(CN)6 stable com-
pounds. Other NOC were determined as mercury(II) and K3Fe(CN)6 stable
compounds.

Haem was analysed using the HemoQuant assay (8) as described previously
(11). Brieﬂy, 400 ll hot oxalic acid reagent (3 M oxalic acid, 0.1 M FeSO4, 60
mM uric acid and 60 mM mannitol) was added to 500 mg dietary or faecal
homogenate, mixed and incubated for 30 min at 100°C. After cooling, 1 ml 3
M KAc and 3 ml acetate/acetic acid (10/1 vol/vol) were added. To 2 ml of the
organic phase, 0.8 ml n-butanol and 6 ml 3 M KAc in 1 M KOH was added,
mixed and 1 ml of the organic phase subsequently extracted with 4 ml phos-
phoric acid/acetic acid (2 M phosphoric acid:glacial acetic acid, 9:1 vol/vol).
Fluorescence (excitation, 402 nm; ﬂuorescence, 600 nm) of the aqueous phase
was determined using a Spectramax Gemini XS ﬂuorimeter (Molecular Devi-
ces, Sunnyvale, CA). To quantify samples, dietary and faecal homogenates
were spiked with haemoglobin to obtain a calibration curve. Results are ex-
pressed as mmol/d for diets or nmol/g for faeces.

Faecal water genotoxicity with the comet assay
Faecal water (FW) was prepared by centrifuging 25 g of thawed faecal
homogenate at 50 000g for 2 h at 4°C. The clear supernatant was aliquoted,
snap frozen on dry ice and stored at  80°C until analysis.

Effect of processed and RM on endogenous nitrosation and DNA damage

Caco2 cells (European Collection of Cell Cultures, Salisbury, UK) were
cultured as monolayers in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium containing
10% foetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% non-essential amino acids
and 100 U/l penicillin–streptomycin (all Sigma–Aldrich, Gillingham, UK).
Cells were harvested after a 3 min incubation at 37°C with 0.25% trypsin–
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (Sigma–Aldrich) and resuspended in
non-supplemented Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium. Three hundred micro-
litres of cell suspension (12  104 cells) was incubated with 300 ll FW
(50%) for 30 min at 37°C. A quality control was included in each experiment.
Samples were measured in duplicate in separate experiments.

Cells were centrifuged at 200g for 3 min at 4°C, the supernatant was dis-
carded and cells were resuspended in 420 ll 1% low melting point agarose
made in phosphate-buffered saline. Cells from one treatment were divided as
roughly equal drops of 70 ll over three microscope slides (two gels per
slide), a 22  22 mm coverslip was applied and gels were allowed to set at
4°C. Coverslips were removed and cells were lysed in 2.5 M NaCl; 0.1 M
Na2EDTA; 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 10 and 1% Triton X-100 for 1 h at 4°C.
Microscope slides had been precoated with 1% normal melting point agarose
and left to dry before use.

Slides were rinsed in enzyme buffer (40 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-
N#-2-ethanesulfonic acid, 0.1 M KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA and 0.2 mg/ml bovine
serum albumin, pH 8) three times for 5 min each at 4°C. Per treatment, one
slide was then incubated with enzyme buffer alone, one with endonuclease III
(EndoIII) in buffer and one with formamidopyrimidine (FPG) in buffer for 30
min at 37°C. EndoIII recognizes oxidized pyrimidines and FPG recognizes
altered purines, creating additional DNA strand breaks at these sites.

Subsequently, the DNA was allowed to unwind in electrophoresis solution
(0.3 M NaOH and 1 mM Na2EDTA, pH 13) for 40 min at 4°C before electro-
phoresis at 0.9 V/cm, 300 mA for 30 min at 4°C. Slides were neutralized in
phosphate-buffered saline and rinsed in ultrapure water for 10 min each at 4°C
and left to dry overnight at room temperature.

Gels were stained with 4#,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole and viewed by ﬂuo-
rescence microscopy. Comets were classiﬁed with visual scoring (21); 100
randomly selected comets were classiﬁed into ﬁve classes (0–4) according to
the extent of tail DNA to give an overall score of between 0 and 400 arbitrary
units per treatment.

Statistical analysis
Faecal nitrite values and transit times were 10log transformed to normalize the
distribution and are presented as geometric means and antilogged 95% conﬁ-
dence intervals (CIs). Other results are presented as mean ± SE. Meat versus
VEG results were compared within each study using a paired Student’s t-test
(two tailed). Statistical differences between PM and RM diets (between stud-
ies) were analysed by analysis of covariance with type of meat (PM or RM) as
independent variable and gender as dichotomous covariate to adjust for differ-
ences in male to female ratios between the two studies. Where PM and RM
results are compared (between studies), results are presented as adjusted mean
± SE. Where meat and VEG results are compared (within studies), results are
presented as unadjusted means.

Associations between continuous variables were tested using Pearson’s cor-
relation coefﬁcient (r). P ,0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant. SPSS
16 for Macintosh (SPSS, Chicago, IL, 2008) was used for the analysis.

Results

Dietary NOC and haem
Only male diets were analysed as they contained the largest amount of
meat. PM diets contained 58 ± 15 mmol/d total NOC, composed of 24
± 8 mmol/d RSNO, 20 ± 6 mmol/d FeNO and 14 ± 2 mmol/d other
NOC and 17 ± 10 lmol/d nitrite. The NOC composition of the pro-
cessed meats, i.e. bacon, corned beef, gammon and pork luncheon
meat, is shown in Table I. RM and VEG diets contained negligible
amounts of NOC and nitrite.

Table I. NOC composition (nmol/g cooked weight) of the nitrite-preserved
red meats consumed in the PM study

Total NOC

RSNO

FeNO

Other NOC

Bacon
Corned beef
Gammon
Pork luncheon meat

428
110
84
58

357
26
15
17

45
42
50
27

26
42
19
14

1403

A.M.C.P.Joosen et al.

PM diets contained similar amounts of haem (86 mmol/d) to RM diets

(110 mmol/d). The haem content of the VEG diets was negligible.

Faecal NOC and haem
Faecal levels of NOC on VEG diets were very low but increased
signiﬁcantly on both PM and RM diets (Table II). There was no
statistically signiﬁcant difference in total NOC concentrations on
the PM and RM diets (adjusted means PM 175 ± 19 nmol/g versus
RM 185 ± 22 nmol/g; P 5 0.75). FeNO was the main contributor to
total NOC on both meat diets although the RM diet resulted in a larger
proportion of FeNO (adjusted means RM 78% versus PM 54%;
P , 0.0001) and less RSNO (adjusted means RM 12% versus PM
19%; P , 0.01) and other NOC (adjusted means RM 10% versus PM
27%; P , 0.0001) compared with PM. Similar results were obtained
when absolute concentrations were used.
NOC concentrations in FW used in the comet assay were 1.7% of
the concentration in homogenates before correction for dilution (PM
0.65 nmol/g and RM 0.41 nmol/g).

There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between adjusted
mean faecal nitrite concentrations on the PM diet (19 nmol/g, 95% CI
11–35) and those on the RM diet (28 nmol/g, 95% CI 14–56,
P 5 0.41). Concentrations on both meat diets were signiﬁcantly high-
er than after VEG diets (3 nmol/g, 95% CI 2–6, P , 0.0001). There
was no statistically signiﬁcant correlation between concentrations of
faecal nitrite and total NOC.

Faecal haem was signiﬁcantly higher when the meat diets were con-
sumed as compared with the VEG diets (P , 0.0001, Table II) although
to a lesser extent on the PM diet compared with the RM diet (adjusted
means PM 326 ± 69 nmol/g versus RM 1033 ± 84 nmol/g, n 5 11;
P , 0.0001). Haem concentrations were positively related with FeNO
concentrations on the RM diet (r 5 0.63, P , 0.05; n 5 11) and mar-
ginally on the PM diet (r 5 0.45, P 5 0.08). Haem concentrations
were positively related to RSNO on the RM diet (r 5 0.64, P , 0.05;
n 5 11) but not on the PM diet (r 5 0.15, P 5 0.58).

FW genotoxicity with the comet assay
There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference in DNA breaks induced
in Caco2 cells by FW from both PM and RM diets (adjusted means PM
167 ± 12 versus RM 163 ± 13; P 5 0.80). However, PM resulted in
higher levels of EndoIII-sensitive sites (adjusted means PM 24 ± 5
versus RM 9 ± 5; P , 0.05) and a larger variation in FPG-sensitive
sites compared with RM (Figure 1A). Surprisingly, FW from both di-
etary studies induced signiﬁcantly more DNA strand breaks on the
VEG diets compared with the meat diets (P , 0.05; Table III).

In the comet assay, FPG detects oxidatively damaged purines but
also seems to have a high sensitivity towards N-7 alkylation of
guanine (ring opened) (22). There was no statistically signiﬁcant
correlation between FPG-sensitive sites and NOC concentrations
in faecal homogenates on both meat diets, but NOC concentrations
in FW—despite being relatively low—trended towards a positive
association with FPG-sensitive sites on the PM (r 5 0.55, P 5 0.06;
n 5 12, three samples not analysed, one sample with no peak in
assay) but not on the RM diet (r 5 0.25, P 5 0.49; n 5 10, two
samples no peak in assay) (Figure 1A). There were no signiﬁcant
associations with DNA strand breaks and EndoIII-sensitive sites
(Figure 1B). No NOC could be detected in FW on the VEG diets.
Nitrite concentrations in FW were 18% of those in faecal homo-
genates (PM study only, RM not analysed); there were no statisti-
cally signiﬁcant associations with DNA strand breaks or enzyme-
sensitive sites.

Mean transit time
Mean transit time (MTT) on the PM diet (adjusted geometric mean 44
h, 95% CI 35–55; n 5 15) was signiﬁcantly lower than on the RM diet
(adjusted geometric mean 70 h, 95% CI 55–90; P , 0.01). MTT
during both VEG periods were similar (VEG in PM study 44 h,
95% CI 35–55; n 5 15 versus VEG in RM study 55 h, 95% CI
43–70; P 5 0.18) and not signiﬁcantly different from their respective
meat periods (PM study P 5 0.80 and RM study P 5 0.07).

MTT was positively related with total NOC concentrations (r 5
0.63, P 5 0.01; n 5 15), FeNO (r 5 0.60, P 5 0.02; n 5 15) and
other NOC (r 5 0.74, P , 0.01; n 5 15) but not with RSNO
(r 5 0.13, P 5 0.64; n 5 15) on the PM diet. In contrast, there were
no statistically signiﬁcant correlations between MTT and NOC con-
centrations on the RM diet (P . 0.25).

Daily faecal weight, calculated as the mean faecal weight over
the last 4 days of the diet, was signiﬁcantly higher on the VEG
diet compared with the meat diet in both studies (PM 167.5 ± 11.9
g/d versus VEG 223.8 ± 24.1 g/d; P , 0.05 and RM 148.1 ± 19.5
g/d versus VEG 308.3 ± 41.4 g/d; P , 0.0001). There were no sta-
tistically signiﬁcant differences between studies (P . 0.12). Daily
faecal weight was not statistically signiﬁcantly associated with
MTT on any of the diets or for both studies in total (P . 0.09).

Discussion

Recently, we implicated haem as a facilitator of the endogenous for-
mation of NOC from dietary nitrite or nitrate and nitrite from

Table II. Faecal NOC concentrations (nmol/g) (a) PM diet versus VEG diet (n 5 16); (b) RM diet versus VEG diet (n 5 12) (unadjusted means, comparison
within studies)

Intake

mmol/d

PM
86
58
24
20
14
RM
110
a

a

a

a

Excretion

nmol/g

329 ± 41
181 ± 20

33 ± 4
95 ± 9
53 ± 8

1028 ± 109

177 ± 26

19 ± 4

140 ± 20

18 ± 4

mmol/d

0.05 ± 0.007
28.6 ± 2.9
5.2 ± 0.6
15.3 ± 1.6
8.1 ± 1.2

0.13 ± 0.02
21.7 ± 2.2
2.3 ± 0.3
17.1 ± 1.9
2.2 ± 0.5

Intake

mmol/d

VEG
a

a

a

a

a

VEG
a

a

a

a

a

Excretion

nmol/g


61 ± 5

2.6 ± 0.3

0.2 ± 0.1

2.0 ± 0.3

0.5 ± 0.1

63 ± 11

3.5 ± 0.7

0.4 ± 0.1

1.8 ± 0.3

1.2 ± 0.4

mmol/d


0.01 ± 0.001

0.6 ± 0.06

0.05 ± 0.02

0.4 ± 0.05

0.1 ± 0.02


0.02 ± 0.005

1.0 ± 0.2

0.1 ± 0.02

0.5 ± 0.1
0.3 ± 0.08



(a)
Haem
Total NOC

RSNO
FeNO
Other NOC

(b)
Heam (n 5 11)
Total NOC

RSNO
FeNO
Other NOC



Only male diets analysed. Excretion measured in faecal homogenates and adjusted for dilution. P values for paired Students’ t-test of meat versus VEG,

P , 0.0001,
aNegligible amounts.
PM, processed (nitrite-preserved red) meat.

P 5 0.001,



P , 0.01.

1404

Effect of processed and RM on endogenous nitrosation and DNA damage

faeces by Mirvish et al. (24), which were deﬁned as NOC that were
formed after in vitro nitrosation of faecal supernatant.

The endogenous formation of NOC is likely to begin with the
formation of RSNO in the stomach, as acidic conditions facilitate
the formation of these compounds (11). These compounds can then
promote the formation of other NOC, in particular nitrosyl haem, in
the anaerobic and reducing environment of the gastrointestinal tract.
Considering the importance of NOC production along the gastroin-
testinal tract, the association between MTT and faecal NOC concen-
trations was investigated in the meat diets. The statistically signiﬁcant
association between MTT and faecal NOC concentrations on the PM
diet—in particular for FeNO compounds–supports the hypothesis that
these compounds are formed in the anaerobic conditions of the small
and large intestines. However, the lack of association following the
RM diet with a signiﬁcantly longer transit times suggests a threshold
effect.

The alkaline comet assay detects DNA strand breaks and alkali-
labile sites, i.e. apurinic or apyrimidinic sites or baseless sugars.
These can result from a variety of damage and might also represent
intermediates in the repair process. Including DNA glycosylase en-
zymes results in excision of oxidatively damaged nucleobases from
the DNA strand, which leaves additional strand breaks (21). Despite
the different composition of faecal NOC on PM and RM diets, there
was no clear effect on FW-induced DNA strand breaks, but
PM resulted in signiﬁcantly more FW-induced EndoIII-sensitive
sites. However, due to the very low concentrations of total NOC in
the FW, we were not able to analyse NOC composition and hence
cannot relate NOC composition of the FW and the faecal homoge-
nates. We have currently no explanation for the unexpected higher
level of DNA strand breaks on the VEG diets as compared with the
high meat diets, which is intriguing given a recent study showing
a higher colorectal cancer incidence in vegetarians than in meat
eaters (25). Nevertheless, further studies are underway exchanging
red or PM with white meat or ﬁsh to eliminate possible interfering
plant constituents, e.g. polyphenols. Dietary analysis of total phe-
nols using the Folin–Ciolcalteu method showed similar levels of
phenols in our meat and VEG study diets (data not shown), but this
test does not distinguish between different kinds of polyphenolic
compounds. However, we have not been able as yet to obtain reliable
estimates for FW levels with this method.

The aqueous fraction of faeces, prepared by either direct ultracen-
trifugation, dilution in phosphate-buffered saline or ultrapure water or
reconstitution of freeze-dried faeces, has been shown to be genotoxic
in several colonic cell lines (26–30). Previous studies, the most recent
ones using nuclear magnetic resonance proﬁling, have identiﬁed
a number of compounds in FW including short chain fatty acids,
organic acids, phenolic compounds and amino acids. Inter- and intra-
individual differences are related to variation in concentrations rather
than composition, which in turn seem to be related to diet (31,32).
However, still little is known about the nature of FW, which may
explain inconsistent results when investigating the effect of diet on
DNA damage using the comet assay (26,27,29).

Colonic cells have been shown to be susceptible to NOC-induced
damage. Potassium diazoacetate, a stable nitrosated derivative
of glycine, shows a dose–response effect on genotoxicity in
Caco2 cells, human lymphocytes and rat colonocytes (33) and N-
nitrosomorpholine causes a dose-dependent increase in DNA strand
breaks in Caco2 cells, all of which originated from alkali-labile
sites (34). No oxidative damage was observed, although pretreat-
ment with vitamins E and C reduced the formation of strand breaks
(34). Our results showed the presence of altered purines and pyr-
imidines induced by FW, with higher levels of oxidized pyrimidines
on the PM diet compared with the RM diet. Despite the NOC levels
in FW being very low compared with the faecal homogenates, they
tended to be positively related to altered purines on the PM diet
indicating that they are related to oxidative damage.

Nitrite intake from PM was 0.8 mg/d (17 lmol/d) in our study.
Intake of NaNO2 by PM consumption in the UK, Spain and Germany
reported in the European Prospective Study of Cancer and Nutrition

1405

Fig. 1. FW-induced FPG-sensitive sites (A) and EndoIII-sensitive sites (B)
in Caco2 cells measured with the comet assay versus total NOC
concentrations in FW. Processed meat diet (n 5 13, open circles) and RM
diet (n 5 9, ﬁlled squares).

Table III. Level of FW-induced DNA strand breaks, EndoIII- and FPG-
sensitive sites in Caco2 cells measured with the comet assay (a) PM diet
versus VEG diet (n 5 16); (b) RM diet versus VEG diet (n 5 12)
(unadjusted means, comparison within studies)

Mean

SE

Mean

SE Mean

SE

(a)

Strand breaks (AU)
EndoIII sites (AU)
FPG sites (AU)

(b)

Strand breaks (AU)
EndoIII sites (AU)
FPG sites (AU)

Control slides
3
113
2
8
25
5
Control slides
113
3
2
8
25
5

PM
164
24
39
RM
167
9
24

VEG

206
26
42
VEG

196
15
28

13
5
8

13
4
6

17
6
7

15
6
4

AU, arbitrary units; PM, processed (nitrite-preserved red) meat. P value for
paired Students’ t-test of meat versus VEG,

P , 0.05. Control slides were incubated with phosphate-buffered saline and
represent the level of background DNA strand breaks.

inducible and endogenous nitric oxide synthases (9,11,23). Similar to
our previous studies, faecal NOC levels were low (3–4 nmol/g) on
diets containing no meat and a negligible amount of haem. On nitrite-
preserved (PM) and fresh RM diets containing similar amounts of
haem (86–110 mmol/d), faecal NOC levels increase signiﬁcantly to
180 nmol/g.

Dietary NOC in the PM diet (58 mmol/d) was in the same order of
magnitude or greater as excretion, whereas NOC content of the RM
diet was negligible but resulted in similar levels of excretion in faeces
as on the PM diet (adjusted means PM 28.4 ± 2.6 mmol/d and RM
22.0 ± 3.0 mmol/d). However, on a RM diet, faecal FeNO represent
a greater proportion of total NOC compared with the PM diet and
concentrations are positively associated with haem concentrations. In
addition, on both meat diets, concentrations of FeNO were signiﬁ-
cantly higher than those of RSNO, which conﬁrms the important
contribution of haem to endogenous NOC production (9).

Mirvish et al. (24) studied mice fed hot dogs with or without
NaNO2 and concluded that faecal NOC excretion represents mainly
excretion of ingested NOC and of NOC formed by nitrosation of
precursor NOC by nitrite. In contrast, our results suggest that faecal
NOC are unlikely to be simply derived from the diet and are mainly
formed endogenously. However, the preformed NOC present in our
study diets are not to be confused with the precursor NOC analysed in

A.M.C.P.Joosen et al.

was 0.1–3.3 mg/d for women and 0.8–5.4 mg/d for men (adjusted for
energy intake, age, weekday and season), which would be somehow
lower when nitrite alone is calculated (15). The link between dietary
nitrite and cancers of the gastrointestinal
is inconclusive
(35,36), which may be because most nitrite is absorbed early
and the majority does not reach the colon (37). There was no asso-
ciation between FW nitrite and FW-induced DNA damage on our
PM diet.

tract

In conclusion, meats cured with nitrite have the same effect as
fresh RM on endogenous nitrosation but show increased FW-induced
oxidative DNA damage, which could be a result of pro-oxidative
compounds derived from both dietary factors or endogenous
immune response. The higher level of DNA strand breaks on the
VEG diets is an intriguing ﬁnding that needs to be clariﬁed in further
studies.

Acknowledgements

We thank Valerie Church, Hilary Slack and Judith Wills for preparing the study
diets and taking care of the volunteers and Marleen Lentjes for help in using
DINER.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: None declared.

References

1. Cross,A.J. et al. (2007) A prospective study of red and processed meat

intake in relation to cancer risk. PLoS Med., 4, e325.

2. Larsson,S.C. et al. (2006) Meat consumption and risk of colorectal cancer:

a meta-analysis of prospective studies. Int. J. Cancer, 119, 2657–2664.

3. Norat,T. et al. (2005) Meat, ﬁsh, and colorectal cancer risk: the European
Prospective Investigation into cancer and nutrition. J. Natl Cancer Inst., 97,
906–916.

4. Sugimura,T. (1997) Overview of carcinogenic heterocyclic amines. Mutat.

Res., 376, 211–219.

5. Rohrmann,S. et al. (2007) Intake of heterocyclic aromatic amines from
meat in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition
(EPIC)-Heidelberg cohort. Br. J. Nutr., 98, 1112–1115.

6. Bingham,S.A. et al. (2002) Effect of white versus red meat on endogenous
N-nitrosation in the human colon and further evidence of a dose response.
J. Nutr., 132, 3522S–3525S.

7. Hughes,R. et al. (2001) Dose-dependent effect of dietary meat on endog-

enous colonic N-nitrosation. Carcinogenesis, 22, 199–202.

8. Schwartz,S. et al. (1985) Quantitative fecal recovery of ingested hemoglo-
bin-heme in blood: comparisons by HemoQuant assay with ingested meat
and ﬁsh. Gastroenterology, 89, 19–26.

9. Cross,A.J. et al. (2003) Haem, not protein or inorganic iron, is responsible
for endogenous intestinal N-nitrosation arising from red meat. Cancer Res.,
63, 2358–2360.

10. Bonnett,R. et al. (1975) Reactions of nitrous acid and nitric oxide with
porphyrins and haems. Nitrosylhaems as nitrosating agents. J. Chem.
Soc. Chem. Commun., 884–885.

11. Kuhnle,G.G. et al. (2007) Diet-induced endogenous formation of nitroso

compounds in the GI tract. Free Radic. Biol. Med., 43, 1040–1047.

12. Kuhnle,G.G. et al. (2007) Dietary meat, endogenous nitrosation and co-

lorectal cancer. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 35, 1355–1357.

13. Povey,A.C. et al. (2002) DNA alkylation and repair in the large bowel:

animal and human studies. J. Nutr., 132, 3518S–3521S.

14. Lewin,M.H. et al. (2006) Red meat enhances the colonic formation of the
DNA adduct O6-carboxymethyl guanine: implications for colorectal cancer
risk. Cancer Res., 66, 1859–1865.

15. Linseisen,J. et al. (2006) Dietary intake of different types and characteristics
of processed meat which might be associated with cancer risk—results from
the 24-hour diet recalls in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer
and Nutrition (EPIC). Public Health Nutr., 9, 449–464.

1406

16. Rowland,I.R. et al. (1991) Endogenous N-nitrosation in man assessed by
measurement of apparent total N-nitroso compounds in faeces. Carcino-
genesis, 12, 1395–1401.

17. Cummings,J.H. et al. (1976) Measurement of the mean transit time of

dietary residue through the human gut. Gut, 17, 210–218.

18. Welch,A.A. et al. (2001) DINER (Data Into Nutrients for Epidemiological
Research)—a new data-entry program for nutritional analysis in the EPIC-
Norfolk cohort and the 7-day diary method. Public Health Nutr., 4, 1253–
1265.

19. Department of Health. (1991) Dietary Reference Values for Food, Energy
and Nutrients for the United Kingdom (Report on Health and Social Sub-
jects No. 41). HMSO, London, UK.

20. Feelisch,M. et al. (2002) Concomitant S-, N-, and heme-nitros(yl)ation in
biological tissues and ﬂuids: implications for the fate of NO in vivo. FASEB
J., 16, 1775–1785.

21. Collins,A.R. (2004) The comet assay for DNA damage and repair: princi-

ples, applications, and limitations. Mol. Biotechnol., 26, 249–261.

22. Speit,G. et al. (2004) Sensitivity of the FPG protein towards alkylation

damage in the comet assay. Toxicol. Lett., 146, 151–158.

23. Roediger,W.E. et al. (1990) Nitrite from inﬂammatory cells–a cancer risk

factor in ulcerative colitis? Dis. Colon Rectum, 33, 1034–1036.

24. Mirvish,S.S. et al. (2008) Effect of feeding nitrite, ascorbate, hemin, and
omeprazole on excretion of fecal total apparent N-nitroso compounds in
mice. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 21, 2344–2351.

25. Key,T.J. et al. (2009) Cancer incidence in vegetarians: results from the
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC-
Oxford). Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 89, 1620S–1626S.

26. Cross,A.J. et al. (2006) Variability in fecal water genotoxicity, determined
using the Comet assay, is independent of endogenous N-nitroso compound
formation attributed to red meat consumption. Environ. Mol. Mutagen., 47,
179–184.

27. Glinghammar,B. et al. (1997) Shift from a dairy product-rich to a dairy
product-free diet:
inﬂuence on cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of fecal
water—potential risk factors for colon cancer. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 66,
1277–1282.

28. Klinder,A. et al. (2007) Fecal water as a non-invasive biomarker in nutri-
tional intervention: comparison of preparation methods and reﬁnement of
different endpoints. Nutr. Cancer, 57, 158–167.

29. Rieger,M.A. et al. (1999) A diet high in fat and meat but low in dietary ﬁbre
increases the genotoxic potential of ‘faecal water’. Carcinogenesis, 20,
2311–2316.

30. Venturi,M. et al. (1997) Genotoxic activity in human faecal water and the
role of bile acids: a study using the alkaline comet assay. Carcinogenesis,
18, 2353–2359.

31. Jacobs,D.M. et al. (2008) (1)H NMR metabolite proﬁling of feces as a tool
to assess the impact of nutrition on the human microbiome. NMR Biomed.,
21, 615–626.

32. Pettersson,J. et al. (2008) NMR metabolomic analysis of fecal water from

subjects on a vegetarian diet. Biol. Pharm. Bull., 31, 1192–1198.

33. Anderson,D. et al. (1999) The effect of potassium diazoacetate on human
peripheral lymphocytes, human adenocarcinoma Colon caco-2 cells, and
rat primary colon cells in the comet assay. Teratog. Carcinog. Mutagen., 19,
137–146.

34. Robichova,S. et al. (2001) Study of N-nitrosomorpholine-induced DNA
strand breaks in Caco-2 cells by the classical and modiﬁed comet assay:
inﬂuence of vitamins E and C. Nutr. Cancer, 39, 267–272.

35. Jakszyn,P. et al. (2006) Endogenous versus exogenous exposure to N-nitro-
so compounds and gastric cancer risk in the European Prospective Inves-
tigation
study.
Carcinogenesis, 27, 1497–1501.

(EPIC-EURGAST)

into Cancer

and Nutrition

36. Knekt,P. et al. (1999) Risk of colorectal and other gastro-intestinal cancers
after exposure to nitrate, nitrite and N-nitroso compounds: a follow-up
study. Int. J. Cancer, 80, 852–856.

37. Florin,T.H. et al. (1990) The effect of dietary nitrate on nitrate and nitrite

excretion in man. Br. J. Nutr., 64, 387–397.

Received March 24, 2009; revised May 8, 2009; accepted May 19, 2009

Effect of processed and RM on endogenous nitrosation and DNA damage

Appendix. Nutrient composition of the dietsa,b

PM

VEG

All (n 5 16)

Female (n 5 11)

Male (n 5 5)

All (n 5 16)

Female (n 5 11)

Male (n 5 5)

9
145 (27)
80 (33)
30 (12)
27 (11)
16 (6)
230 (43)
19
811
18
189
74

RM

8
137 (29)
71 (32)
27 (12)
24 (11)
13 (6)
200 (42)
16
762
17
168
73

11
163 (25)
101 (33)
37 (12)
33 (11)
22 (7)
296 (45)
23
918
22
236
77

9
77 (14)
79 (31)
33 (12)
23 (9)
14 (6)
321 (59)
30
1187
14
244
112

VEG

8
73 (15)
66 (29)
24 (11)
20 (9)
15 (7)
289 (59)
28
1115
13
229
100

12
85 (12)
107 (34)
51 (16)
32 (10)
11 (4)
389 (57)
34
1348
17
277
138

All (n 5 12)

Female (n 5 6)

Male (n 5 6)

All (n 5 12)

Female (n 5 6)

Male (n 5 6)

10
147 (25)
80 (29)
34 (12)
27 (10)
10 (4)
293 (49)
12
895
16
318
93

9
133 (25)
70 (29)
26 (11)
24 (10)
13 (5)
265 (50)
11
875
15
274
90

11
161 (25)
90 (30)
41 (14)
30 (10)
7 (2)
321 (49)
13
915
18
361
95

9
77 (14)
81 (31)
33 (13)
25 (10)
14 (5)
323 (58)
30
1093
16
291
86

8
73 (15)
68 (29)
24 (10)
21 (9)
16 (7)
296 (59)
28
1058
15
267
71

10
80 (13)
95 (34)
42 (15)
29 (10)
12 (4)
351 (57)
33
1128
18
315
100

Energy intake (MJ)
Protein (g/d)
Fat (g/d)

SFA (g/d)
MUFA (g/d)
PUFA (g/d)

Carbohydrates (g/d)
Fibre (g/d)
Calcium (mg/d)
Iron (mg/d)
Folate (lg/d)
Vitamin C (mg/d)

Energy intake (MJ)
Protein (g/d)
Fat (g/d)

SFA (g/d)
MUFA (g/d)
PUFA (g/d)

Carbohydrates (g/d)
Fibre (g/d)
Calcium (mg/d)
Iron (mg/d)
Folate (lg/d)
Vitamin C (mg/d)

SFA, saturated fatty acids; MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acids; PM, processed (nitrite-preserved red) meat; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids.
aMean nutrient intake.
bValues between parentheses represent %energy.

1407

Diet and breast cancer prognosis: making sense of the Women’s
Healthy Eating and Living and Women’s Intervention Nutrition
Study trials
John P. Pierce

Cancer Prevention and Control Program, Moores
UCSD Cancer Center, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA

Correspondence to John P. Pierce, PhD, Cancer
Prevention and Control Program, Moores UCSD
Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093-0901, USA
Tel: +1 858 822 2380; fax: +1 858 822 2399;
e-mail: jppierce@ucsd.edu

Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology
2009, 21:86–91

Purpose of review
To clarify the role of dietary pattern on prognosis in breast cancer survivors.
Recent ﬁndings
Observational trials show mixed results that do not strongly support an independent role
for dietary pattern in prognosis. Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study and Women’s
Healthy Eating and Living (WHEL) are two large randomized controlled trials that
address this question. The interventions from both studies achieved signiﬁcant
reductions in energy from fat, and the WHEL Study achieved large increases in
vegetables, fruit and ﬁber. Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study examined
postmenopausal women only and reported a not-quite-signiﬁcant improved prognosis
for women in the intervention group, with the beneﬁt focused on ipsilateral localized
recurrences, but little improvement in the more important distal recurrences. This review
considers only WHEL postmenopausal women to aid a direct comparison with
Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study. The WHEL Study reported a convincing lack of
association between diet and prognosis. However, a secondary analysis suggests that
the dietary intervention reduced distal recurrences among the subgroup without hot
ﬂashes at baseline.
Summary
There is no convincing evidence that changing dietary pattern following breast cancer
diagnosis will improve prognosis for most women with early stage breast cancer.
However, it would appear to be important for some subgroups. Further investigation of
mechanisms for such selective action is needed.

Keywords
breast cancer prognosis, dietary pattern, randomized trials

Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 21:86–91
ß 2009 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
1040-872X

Introduction
Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers among
women in developed countries, and signiﬁcant advances
in early detection and treatment have led to high 10-year
survival rates and large prevalent survivor populations.
Clinical outcome among women diagnosed with appar-
ently similar cancers varies considerably, and does not
appear to be explained by treatment differences. Labora-
tory studies have identiﬁed multiple bioactive constitu-
ents in foods that appear to either promote carcinogenesis
or protect against it. As a result, there is considerable
interest in the question of whether dietary pattern can
inﬂuence a woman’s prognosis following breast cancer.

Prospective observational studies, or cohort studies,
measure the dietary component or pattern and then
monitor prognosis over time. These association studies

do not provide sufﬁcient evidence to conclude that
changing dietary pattern would alter prognosis. The ‘gold
standard’ studies are randomized trials in which some
participants are assigned to make a major dietary change.
Several prospective observational studies have investi-
gated the link between dietary pattern and breast cancer
prognosis, and to date, two randomized clinical trials have
tested this association.

Observational studies
Most dietary studies, however, are compromised by
measurement errors in the commonly used self-reported
dietary patterns [1], and there are few proven biomarkers
of exposure to validate self-report. The extent of these
measurement errors has been highlighted by two separate
studies that have demonstrated that different self-
report methods change the study outcome [2,3]. Another

1040-872X ß 2009 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI:10.1097/GCO.0b013e32831da7f2

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

study showed an effect with a biomarker that was not
seen with self-reported intake [4,5].



Reviews of the observational studies of diet and breast
cancer prognosis have identiﬁed 14 studies since 1990
[6,7,8
,9–21]. However, many of these studies measured
prebreast cancer dietary pattern shortly following diag-
nosis with breast cancer. As diets commonly change
following diagnosis [22], dietary recalls over extended
periods that include diagnosis have additional measure-
ment problems and are excluded from this review.

In 1994, the Canadian National Breast Screening Study
reported 5-year survival data from the subsample of 678
breast cancer cases that had completed a diet history prior
to diagnosis [23]. In this study, lower saturated fat intake
(but not intake of total fat or oleic acid) was associated
with survival, and women in the highest versus lowest
quartiles of intake of b carotene and vitamin C from food
sources appeared protected.

The Nurses’ Health Study is a well-known long-term
investigation of a cohort of female registered nurses.
Holmes et al. [15] reported on a subsample (n¼ 1982)
who were diagnosed with breast cancer from 1976 to 1990
and completed a dietary assessment in the postdiagnosis
period and followed through 1994. Consumption of fruit,
red meat or grain-based products was not associated with
either all-cause mortality or breast carcinoma death.
However, among women with metastatic cancer, con-
sumption of vegetables, carotenoids and ﬁber had lower
mortality rates. Kroenke et al. [17] reported on the 2619
nurses who were diagnosed from 1982 to 1998 and
completed a dietary questionnaire at least 1 year after
diagnosis. Over a median follow-up of 9 years, 9% of
participants died from breast cancer. Using factor
analysis,
researchers identiﬁed two dietary patterns:
one in which vegetables, fruit, whole grains, low fat dairy,
poultry, ﬁsh and ﬁber consumption increased across
quintiles (prudent dietary pattern), and the other in
which consumption of reﬁned grains, red meat, processed
meat, high-fat dairy, saturated fat and dessert increased
across quintiles (western dietary pattern). Neither dietary
pattern was related to breast cancer mortality. However,
the prudent dietary pattern reduced and Western dietary
pattern increased deaths from other causes. Thus, the
no-association result for dietary fat consumption was
consistent across these two overlapping cohorts, but
the conclusions for a mortality association with the con-
sumption of vegetables, fruit and ﬁber were not.

The Women’s Healthy Eating and Living (WHEL)
Study reported observational data from women random-
ized to the comparison group. Dietary assessment
occurred an average of 2 years after diagnosis, and dietary
patterns were validated with a plasma carotenoid con-

Diet and breast cancer prognosis Pierce 87



centration, the accepted biomarker of vegetable and fruit
intake. The ﬁrst report [19] focused on 205 women who
had a breast cancer event prior to June 2004 (average of
5 years follow-up), and identiﬁed those in the lowest
baseline tertile (compared to all others) of circulating
carotenoid concentrations as having an approximate 40%
increased risk. The second report [24
] focused on over-
all mortality and included follow-up through December
2005. No association was found for energy from fat.
Vegetable–fruit consumption and physical activity were
weakly associated by themselves, but there was an inter-
action between them with the combination of vegetable–
fruit intake (at least 5 vegetables and fruits/day), and
physical activity (equivalent
to walking briskly for
30 min, 6 days a week) reduced the risk of dying from
breast cancer by half, regardless of weight, although fewer
obese women were physically active with a healthy
dietary pattern (16 versus 30%). The effect was stronger
in women who had hormone receptor-positive cancers.

Comparing Women’s Healthy Eating and Living and
Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study randomized trials
Both the Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study (WINS)
and the WHEL Study randomized women who had been
diagnosed with early stage breast cancer in the United
States during the period from 1990 to 1999, before the
widespread use of aromatase inhibitors. Both studies
excluded stage I patients with <1 cm tumors, but there
were three important differences in the eligibility criteria.
The ﬁrst was age: WINS enrolled postmenopausal
women aged 48–79 years at diagnosis, whereas WHEL
enrolled women aged 18–70 years. However, to compare
studies, it is possible to categorize WHEL participants by
menopausal status (Table 1). Both the WHEL (n¼ 2448)
and the WINS (n¼ 2437) studies had almost equiva-
lently-sized populations of postmenopausal women.

The second difference was the time between diagnosis
and enrollment. WINS enrolled women within 1 year of
diagnosis, whereas the WHEL Study enrolled women
within 4 years of diagnosis (Table 1). Thus, the WHEL
Study undersampled the population who would recur
within 4 years of diagnosis and is really a study of breast
cancer events between 2 and 10 years from diagnosis [25].
WINS, on the contrary, is focused much more on breast
cancer events within the ﬁrst 5 years from diagnosis.
The third difference was that WINS excluded women
with worse prognoses (based on tumor size and nodes),
whereas WHEL postmenopausal women had more
advanced cancer characteristics at diagnosis. Over half
of WINS participants were stage I compared with just
over a third of the WHEL sample, and 25% of WHEL
women were stage IIB or IIIA, compared with only 10%
of WINS. In both studies, about one-ﬁfth of postmeno-
pausal women had estrogen receptor-negative tumors at
diagnosis.

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

88 Breast cancer

Table 1 Cancer characteristics of Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study and Women’s Healthy Eating and Living Study populations

WINS Study

WHEL Study

Postmenopausal

Postmenopausal

Premenopausal and

perimenopausal

Intervention
N¼ 975

Comparison
N¼ 1462

Intervention
N¼ 1228

Comparison
N¼ 1220

Intervention
N¼ 309

Comparison
N¼ 331

Time since diagnosis

<1 year
1–2 years
2–3 years
3–4 years

Stage of initial cancer

I
IIA
IIB
IIIA

Estrogen receptor status

Positive, %
Negative, %

N, sample size.

100%

–
–
–

54.5%
32.0%
10.5%

79.0%
21.0%

100%

–
–
–

54.5%
31.9%
9.6%

81.3%
18.7%

18.6
33.1
26.2
22.1

37.2
37.8
20.0
5.1

77.0
21.7

17.1
33.4
26.2
23.2

37.9
37.9
19.2
5.1

75.5
24.3

40.1
26.2
17.2
16.5

41.4
35.0
19.1
4.5

71.2
27.8

42.6
30.2
15.7
11.5

43.5
36.9
14.8
4.8

65.9
32.0

Despite the above differences in cancer characteristics,
both studies recruited breast cancer survivors from similar
populations. Socio-demographic characteristics of WINS
and WHEL participants were markedly similar (Table 2)
in terms of age (55 versus 58 years), race (85% were
Caucasian) and education (almost 50% college gradu-
ates). Approximately 27% of postmenopausal participants
in both studies were obese, and the mean energy intake
from fat was 29%.

These WINS and WHEL comparisons include WHEL
participants who were premenopausal and perimenopau-
sal. These women were younger, more highly educated
and less likely to be obese (Table 2). They were also
more likely to be recruited in the ﬁrst year and more
likely to be estrogen receptor negative (Table 1).

intake [26] (Table 3). Although it appeared that this
between-group difference was maintained through 5 years,
the low response rate for dietary assessments makes this
result questionable (year 3 response approximately 70%;
year 5 response approximately 40%). In reporting a com-
pleters-only analysis, the authors assumed that diets of the
large proportion of nonrespondents were similar to the
diets of the respondents – a very questionable assumption.
Using a more conservative assumption (that nonrespon-
dents didn’t lower their fat intake), an estimate of the
between-group difference is approximately 6% at year 3
and 3.5% at year 5. WINS also reported that the interven-
tion group lost weight, resulting in a between-group
difference of 2.3 kg in year 1 (conservative assump-
tion¼ approximately 1.6 kg) to 2.7 kg in year 5 (conser-
vative assumption¼ approximately 1.1 kg).

The effect of the Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study
intervention
Both the WINS and the WHEL studies used sets of four
24 h recalls to assess current dietary pattern at multiple
points in time. The WINS intervention focused on redu-
cing fat intake to 15% of energy. At 1 year, the intervention
reported a 9% between-group difference in dietary fat

The effect of the Women’s Healthy Eating and Living
Study intervention
The WHEL Study intervention encouraged women to
adopt a daily dietary pattern including ﬁve vegetable
servings, 16 oz of vegetable juice, three fruit servings,
30 g of ﬁber and 20% energy from fat. Unlike WINS,
there was only a small decline in completion rates for

Table 2 Comparison of Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study and Women’s Healthy Eating and Living Study populations

WINS Study

WHEL Study

Postmenopausal

Postmenopausal

Premenopausal and

perimenopausal

Intervention
N¼ 975

Comparison
N¼ 1462

Intervention
N¼ 1228

Comparison
N¼ 1220

Intervention
N¼ 309

Comparison
N¼ 331

Mean age, years (95% CI)
Caucasian, %
College graduate, %
Obese (BMI >30), %
Dietary energy from fat, %

58.6 (44.4–72.8)

58.5 (43.6–73.4)

55 (40–70)

55 (40–70)

43 (32–54)

42 (30–54)

84.7
48.3
27.3
29.6

84.5
50.1
26.5
29.6

86.2
54.7
28.1
28.4

85.8
49.8
27.1
28.6

79.9
58.6
21.0
29.0

84.9
64.4
18.7
29.0

CI, conﬁdence interval; N, sample size.

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Table 3 Change achieved by Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study intervention

Baseline

Year 1

Year 3

Year 5

Diet and breast cancer prognosis Pierce 89

840 (86)
1328 (91)
I-C Difference

 8.9
 2.3

654 (67)
1077 (74)
 9.0 (adj 6.0)

 1.8

380 (39)
648 (44)
 8.0 (adj 3.5)

N (RR%)

Intervention (I)
Comparison (C)

975 (100)
1461 (100)

I

C

Energy from fat (%)
Weight (kg)

 2.7
adj, adjusted for large non-response; C, comparison; I, intervention; N, sample size; RR, response rate. Adapted with permission from [26].

29.6
72.6

29.6
72.7

dietary assessment and 85% were assessed at year 6
(Table 4). The study has presented dietary change data
in two ways: using a completers-only analysis [24
] as
well as with the conservative assumption that nonrespon-
ders did not change their dietary pattern [27].





To compare dietary change with WINS, we present the
completers-only data in Table 4 [24
]. The intervention
was associated with a between-group difference of 4.7
vegetable–fruit servings/day at 1 year that decreased to 3
servings/day by 6 years. The between-group difference
for ﬁber consumption was 8 g/day at year 1, decreasing to
5 g/day at year 6. The between-group difference in
energy from fat was 5.7% at 1 year, decreasing to 3.5%
at 6 years, similar to the conservative estimate of the
WINS intervention effect. Body weight changed little
over 6 years. The conservative analysis concluded that, at
4 years, the relative between-group differences were 65%
for vegetables (including juice), 25% for fruit, 30% for
ﬁber and 13% for energy from fat.

Study outcomes: Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study
versus Women’s Healthy Eating and Living Study
The WINS and the WHEL studies have reported con-
ﬂicting results. WINS assessed the summary variable ‘any
breast cancer event’ for their analysis and the 2.6%
between-group difference was borderline signiﬁcant in
the planned stratiﬁed log rank test (P¼ 0.077), although
statistically signiﬁcant in the multivariate Cox model
(P¼ 0.034) [26]. Further, an exploratory analysis suggested
that the between-group differences in breast cancer events
might be conﬁned to the 20% of the sample with initial
tumors that were estrogen receptor negative; however, the
interaction between dietary intervention and hormone
receptor status was not statistically signiﬁcant.



] reported no between-group
The WHEL Study [24
differences in either any breast cancer event [adjusted

Hazard Ratio (HRadj)¼ 0.63] or in overall mortality
(HRadj¼ 0.43). Additionally, for breast cancer events,

the likelihood ratio tests for baseline dietary pattern by
study group interaction were not signiﬁcant for veg-
etable–fruit, ﬁber or energy from fat. However, for over-
all mortality, the likelihood ratio test was signiﬁcant for
quartiles of energy from fat (P¼ 0.04), although the effect
seemed to be only in the second quartile of baseline
energy from fat, and the intervention group difference
was not in a protective direction. Further, hormone
receptor status did not differ between groups (P¼ 0.85).

Given the considerable similarities between these
randomized trials, the marked difference in these ﬁndings
requires further investigation. Table 5 presents details
of the different study outcomes for postmenopausal
women. As expected, from the initial cancer characteristics
(Table 1) and the longer follow-up period, WHEL
reported more study events than WINS (Table 5) and
particularly more distal recurrences that Tang [28] has
argued are the most important study outcomes for patients
with a preexisting breast cancer diagnosis. The size of the
between-group difference in these distal recurrences was
not that different for both of these studies (WINS¼ 1.1,
WHEL¼ 0.9).

The difference in the studies occurred in the between-
group differences in the proportion of women who had
local recurrences and new primary breast cancer events
(WINS¼ 1.3%, WHEL¼þ0.5%), and, in particular,
the WINS group effect was among women who had a
lumpectomy for their initial cancer and had an ipsilateral
breast cancer recurrence during the follow-up period

Table 4 Change achieved by Women’s Healthy Eating and Living Study intervention

Baseline

Year 1

Year 3

Year 5

N (RR%)

Intervention (I)
Comparison (C)

Vegetable–fruit (serving/day)
Fiber (g/day)
Energy from fat (%)
Weight (kg)

1537 (100)
1551 (100)

I

7.4
21.1
28.5
73.5

C
7.2
21.2
28.7
73.3

1463 (95)
1484 (96)

þ4.7
þ8.0
 5.7
 0.8

C, comparison; I, intervention; N, sample size; RR, response rate. Adapted with permission from [24

1355 (88)
1363 (88)

I-C Difference

þ3.5
þ5.9
 4.3
þ0.1


].

1308 (85)
1313 (85)

þ3.0
þ5.3
 3.5
þ0.4

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

90 Breast cancer

Table 5 Comparison of cancer outcomes in Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study and Women’s Healthy Eating and Living Study
populations

WINS Study

Postmenopausal

WHEL Study

Postmenopausal

Comparison
N¼ 1462

Intervention
N¼ 975

Difference

Comparison
N¼ 1220

Intervention
N¼ 1228

Difference

76 (5.2)
12 (0.8)
93 (6.4)

181 (12.4)

50 (3.4)
19 (1.3)

38 (3.9)
6 (0.6)
52 (5.3)
96 (9.8)
28 (2.9)
15 (1.5)

250 (17.1%)
1212 (82.9%)

139 (14.3%)
836 (85.7%)

 1.3
 0.2
 1.1
 2.6
 0.5
þ0.2
 2.8

45 (3.7)
8 (0.7)

142 (11.6)
195 (16.0)

40 (4.1)
21 (1.7)

266 (21.8)
954 (78.2)

51 (4.2)
7 (0.6)

131 (10.7)
189 (15.4)

52 (4.3)
25 (2.0)

266 (21.7)
962 (78.3)

þ0.5
 0.1
 0.9
 0.6
þ0.1
þ0.3
 0.1

Study events

Local or new primary
Regional
Distal
Any breast cancer event
Additional primary cancer
Death without breast cancer
Any additional cancer or death
Cancer-free survival

N, sample size.

(comparison¼ 2.1%; intervention¼ 1.1%). It is possible
that the lack of a WHEL effect in this subpopulation of
women reﬂected the fact that WHEL underestimated
events in the ﬁrst few years from diagnosis. Another
plausible explanation is that this ﬁnding is an artifact,
particularly as the main hypothesis was only marginally
statistically signiﬁcant.

Women’s Healthy Eating and Living Study secondary
analysis
The initial WHEL Study protocol [25] postulated that
diet could affect prognosis by reducing circulating estrogen
concentrations. The study’s nested case–control analysis
showed that women with higher circulating estradiol con-
centrations at baseline were less likely to report hot ﬂashes
at that time and more likely to have a secondary cancer

event during the follow-up period [29
]. In two separate
studies, early stage breast cancer survivors who did not
report hot ﬂashes shortly after treatment were approxi-
mately 30% more likely to have additional breast cancer

events [30
,31]. Given that the WHEL Study intervention
has been shown to reduce circulating estrogen concen-
trations [32], the study undertook a secondary analysis to
see whether an intervention effect may have been limited
to this group of women who did not report hot ﬂashes at
baseline [33
About one-third of WHEL participants (n¼ 900) were in
the subgroup who did not report hot ﬂashes at baseline
(no hot ﬂash subgroup) [24
]. The intervention
participants in this no hot ﬂash subgroup had a similarly
large change in dietary pattern (vegetables, fruit, ﬁber
and energy from fat) over the course of the study to that
seen in the overall intervention group. Among the no hot
ﬂash subgroup, 76.4% of the comparison group and 83.9%
of the intervention group remained breast cancer free
(P¼ 0.002). This effect was almost entirely restricted to
the distal recurrence group (comparison¼ 15.9%, inter-
vention¼ 9.4%), and the approximately 60% lower event
rate in the intervention group was not explained by other

,33





].



]. This
variables in a series of sensitivity analyses [33
effect did not differ signiﬁcantly by hormone receptor
status (P¼ 0.63).



Conclusion
The evidence from prospective observational studies is
mixed particularly for vegetable–fruit–ﬁber consumption,
though more consistently negative for fat consumption.
Two randomized trials have been reported: WINS focused
on the dietary fat hypothesis, whereas WHEL focused on a
plant-based dietary pattern that included a reduction in
dietary fat. WHEL reported that the comprehensive
dietary change had no effect on prognosis, whereas WINS
found a marginal positive effect from changing fat.

This review compares postmenopausal participants from
these studies, focusing on what might explain the differ-
ent results. Both studies indicate that dietary pattern is
not a strong ‘across the board’ predictor of prognosis.
Each study suggests that the dietary pattern may be
effective within a subgroup of people. Further investi-
gation of subgroups is required, particularly focused on
population evidence of the mechanism by which these
dietary patterns may impact prognosis.

Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank the WHEL Study Group for providing
partitioned study data for use in this study. The author would also like to
thank Sheila Kealey and Christine Hayes for assistance in
manuscript preparation.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have
been highlighted as:

 of outstanding interest
Additional references related to this topic can also be found in the Current
World Literature section in this issue (p. 108).

of special interest

1

Natarajan L, Flatt SW, Sun X, et al. Validity and systematic error in measuring
carotenoid consumption with dietary self-report instruments. Am J Epidemiol
2006; 163:770–778.

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Bingham SA, Luben R, Welch A, et al. Are imprecise methods obscuring a
relation between fat and breast cancer? Lancet 2003; 362:212–214.

Freedman LS, Potischman N, Kipnis V, et al. A comparison of two dietary
instruments for evaluating the fat-breast cancer relationship. Int J Epidemiol
2006; 35:1011–1021.

Toniolo P, Van Kappel AL, Akhmedkhanov A, et al. Serum carotenoids and
breast cancer. Am J Epidemiol 2001; 153:1142–1147.

Smith-Warner SA, Spiegelman D, Yaun SS, et al.
fruits and
vegetables and risk of breast cancer: a pooled analysis of cohort studies.
JAMA 2001; 285:769–776.

Intake of

Rock CL, Demark-Wahnefried W. Nutrition and survival after the diagnosis
of breast cancer: a review of the evidence. J Clin Oncol 2002; 20:3302–
3316.

Kellen E, Vansant G, Christiaens MR, et al. Lifestyle changes and breast
cancer prognosis: a review. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2008 [Epub ahead of
print].

Pierce JP, Stefanick ML, Flatt SW, et al. Greater survival after breast cancer in
physically active women with high vegetable-fruit intake regardless of obesity.
J Clin Oncol 2007; 25:2345–2351.

This paper is a prospective observational study highlighting the interaction
between dietary pattern, physical activity and obesity as predictors of mortality.

9

Boyapati SM, Shu XO, Ruan ZX, et al. Soyfood intake and breast cancer
survival: a followup of the Shanghai breast cancer study. Breast Cancer Res
Treat 2005; 92:11–17.

10 Holm LE, Nordevang E, Hjalmar ML, et al. Treatment failure and dietary habits

in women with breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993; 85:32–36.

11 Zhang S, Folsom AR, Sellers TA, et al. Better breast cancer survival for
postmenopausal women who are less overweight and eat less fat. The Iowa
Women’s Health Study. Cancer 1995; 76:275–283.

12 McEligot AJ, Largent J, Ziogas A, et al. Dietary fat, ﬁber, vegetable, and
micronutrients are associated with overall survival in postmenopausal women
diagnosed with breast cancer. Nutr Cancer 2006; 55:132–140.

13 Hebert JR, Hurley TG, Ma Y. The effect of dietary exposures on recurrence
and mortality in early stage breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1998;
51:17–28.

14 Rohan TE, Hiller JE, McMichael AJ. Dietary factors and survival from breast

cancer. Nutr Cancer 1993; 20:167–177.

15 Holmes MD, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al. Dietary factors and the survival of

women with breast carcinoma. Cancer 1999; 86:826–835.

16 Kyogoku S, Hirohata T, Nomura Y, et al. Diet and prognosis of breast cancer.

Nutr Cancer 1992; 17:271–277.

17 Kroenke CH, Fung TT, Hu FB, Holmes MD. Dietary patterns and survival after

breast cancer diagnosis. J Clin Oncol 2005; 23:9295–9303.

18 Ingram D. Diet and subsequent survival in women with breast cancer. Br J

Cancer 1994; 69:592–595.

19 Rock CL, Flatt SW, Natarajan L, et al. Plasma carotenoids and recurrence-free
in women with a history of breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2005;

survival
23:6631–6638.

20 Goodwin PJ, Ennis M, Pritchard KI, et al. Diet and breast cancer: evidence that
extremes in diet are associated with poor survival. J Clin Oncol 2003;
21:2500–2507.

Diet and breast cancer prognosis Pierce 91

21 Saxe GA, Rock CL, Wicha MS, Schottenfeld D. Diet and risk for breast
cancer recurrence and survival. Breast Cancer Res Treat 1999; 53:241–
253.

22 Thomson CA, Flatt SW, Rock CL, et al. Increased fruit, vegetable and ﬁber
intake and lower fat intake reported among women previously treated for
invasive breast cancer. J Am Diet Assoc 2002; 102:801–808.

23 Jain M, Miller AB, To T. Premorbid diet and the prognosis of women with

breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1994; 86:1390–1397.

24 Pierce JP, Natarajan L, Caan BJ, et al.

Inﬂuence of a diet very high in
vegetables, fruit, and ﬁber and low in fat on prognosis following treatment
for breast cancer: the women’s healthy eating and living (WHEL) randomized
trial. JAMA 2007; 298:289–298.

This paper in a major general medical journal presents the results of the WHEL
randomized trial (n¼ 3088) reporting both breast cancer-free survival and overall
survival. Subgroup analyses are included for dietary pattern at the start of the trial. The
trial had conﬁrmed health status at 96% of both study groups after trial completion.
The Kaplan–Meier curves from randomized groups with major biomarker-validated
differences in dietary pattern were superimposed for both recurrence and mortality.

25 Pierce JP, Faerber S, Wright FA, et al. A randomized trial of the effect of a
plant-based dietary pattern on additional breast cancer events and survival:
the women’s healthy eating and living (WHEL) study. Control Clin Trials 2002;
23:728–756.

26 Chlebowski RT, Blackburn GL, Thomson CA, et al. Dietary fat reduction and
breast cancer outcome: interim efﬁcacy results from the women’s intervention
nutrition study. J Natl Cancer Inst 2006; 98:1767–1776.

27 Pierce JP, Newman VA, Natarajan L, et al. Telephone counseling helps
maintain long-term adherence to a high-vegetable dietary pattern. J Nutr
2007; 137:2291–2296.

28 Tang SC. Reducing the risk of distant metastases: a better end point in
adjuvant aromatase inhibitor breast cancer trials? Cancer Invest 2008;
26:481–490.

29

Rock CL, Flatt SW, Laughlin GA, et al. Reproductive steroid hormones and
recurrence-free survival in women with a history of breast cancer. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2008; 17:614–620.

This study reports that circulating estrogens are a major predictor of which post-
menopausal women will have an additional breast cancer event in the WHEL study.
30 Mortimer JE, Flatt SW, Parker BA, et al. Tamoxifen, hot ﬂashes and recurrence
This study is the ﬁrst one to identify that women who do not report hot ﬂashes after
breast cancer treatment are at higher risk for early recurrence and death.

in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2008; 108:421–426.

31 Cuzick J. Hot ﬂushes and the risk of recurrence: retrospective, exploratory
results from the ATAC trial. [SABC poster #2069] San Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium; December 2007.

32 Rock CL, Flatt SW, Thomson CA, et al. Effects of a high-ﬁber, low-fat diet
intervention on serum concentrations of reproductive steroid hormones in
women with a history of breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22:2379–2387.
33 Gold EB, Pierce JP, Natarajan L, et al. A high vegetable, fruit, and ﬁber dietary
pattern may inﬂuence breast cancer prognosis in women without hot ﬂashes:
a secondary analysis from the Women’s Healthy Eating and Living (WHEL)
Study. J Clin Oncol (in press).

This paper presents the WHEL study data by hot ﬂash status, and demonstrated
that there was a major reduction in risk of distal events in the intervention group for
those who did not have hot ﬂashes at baseline (and hence were at increased risk).
Numerous sensitivity analyses demonstrated the robustness of this ﬁnding.

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 new england

The

journal 

 medicine

of

established in 1812

april

24

 

2003

, 

vol. 348 no. 17 

Overweight, Obesity, and Mortality from Cancer in a Prospectively 

Studied Cohort of U.S. Adults

Eugenia E. Calle, Ph.D., Carmen Rodriguez, M.D., M.P.H., Kimberly Walker-Thurmond, B.A., and Michael J. Thun, M.D.

From the Department of Epidemiology and
Surveillance Research, American Cancer So-
ciety, Atlanta. Address reprint requests to
Dr. Calle at the American Cancer Society,
1599 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30329,
or at jcalle@cancer.org.

N Engl J Med 2003;348:1625-38.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.

abstract

background
The influence of excess body weight on the risk of death from cancer has not been fully
characterized.

methods
In a prospectively studied population of more than 900,000 U.S. adults (404,576 men
and 495,477 women) who were free of cancer at enrollment in 1982, there were 57,145
deaths from cancer during 16 years of follow-up. We examined the relation in men and
women between the body-mass index in 1982 and the risk of death from all cancers
and from cancers at individual sites, while controlling for other risk factors in multivari-
ate proportional-hazards models. We calculated the proportion of all deaths from can-
cer that was attributable to overweight and obesity in the U.S. population on the basis of
risk estimates from the current study and national estimates of the prevalence of over-
weight and obesity in the U.S. adult population.

results
The heaviest members of this cohort (those with a body-mass index [the weight in kilo-
grams divided by the square of the height in meters] of at least 40) had death rates from
all cancers combined that were 52 percent higher (for men) and 62 percent higher (for
women) than the rates in men and women of normal weight. For men, the relative risk
of death was 1.52 (95 percent confidence interval, 1.13 to 2.05); for women, the relative
risk was 1.62 (95 percent confidence interval, 1.40 to 1.87). In both men and women,
body-mass index was also significantly associated with higher rates of death due to
cancer of the esophagus, colon and rectum, liver, gallbladder, pancreas, and kidney; the
same was true for death due to non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and multiple myeloma. Signif-
icant trends of increasing risk with higher body-mass-index values were observed for
death from cancers of the stomach and prostate in men and for death from cancers of
the breast, uterus, cervix, and ovary in women. On the basis of associations observed in
this study, we estimate that current patterns of overweight and obesity in the United
States could account for 14 percent of all deaths from cancer in men and 20 percent of
those in women.

conclusions
Increased body weight was associated with increased death rates for all cancers com-
bined and for cancers at multiple specific sites.

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

24, 2003

1625

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

t

 new england journal 

The

 medicine
of

1-6

he relations between excess body
weight  and  mortality,  not  only  from  all
causes but also from cardiovascular dis-
ease,  are  well  established.
  Although  we  have
known for some time that excess weight is also an
7
important factor in death from cancer,
 our knowl-
edge of the magnitude of the relation, both for all
cancers and for cancers at individual sites, and the
public health effect of excess weight in terms of to-
tal mortality from cancer is limited.

8-12

11,13,14

Previous studies have consistently shown asso-
ciations between adiposity and increased risk of
cancers  of  the  endometrium,  kidney,  gallbladder
(in women), breast (in postmenopausal women),
and colon (particularly in men).
 Adenocarci-
noma of the esophagus has been linked to obesi-
ty.
 Data on cancers of the pancreas, prostate,
liver, cervix, and ovary and on hematopoietic cancers
are scarce or inconsistent.
 The lack of con-
sistency may be attributable to the limited number
of  studies  (especially  those  with  prospective  co-
horts), the limited range and variable categorization
of overweight and obesity among studies, bias intro-
duced by reverse causality with respect to smoking-
related cancers, and possibly real differences be-
tween the effects of overweight and obesity on the
incidence of cancer and on the rates of death from
some cancers.

7-11,15-17

18,19

We  conducted  a  prospective  investigation  in  a
large cohort of U.S. men and women to determine
the relations between body-mass index (the weight
in kilograms divided by the square of the height in
meters) and the risk of death from cancer at specific
sites. This cohort has been used previously to exam-
ine the association of body-mass index and death
5
from any cause.

methods

study population
The  men  and  women  in  this  study  were  selected
from the 1,184,617 participants in the Cancer Pre-
vention Study II, a prospective mortality study begun
by the American Cancer Society in 1982.
 The
participants were identified and enrolled by more
than 77,000 volunteers in all 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Families were en-
rolled if at least one household member was 45 years
of age or older and all enrolled members were 30
years of age or older. The average age of the partici-
pants at enrollment was 57 years. In 1982 they com-
pleted a confidential mailed questionnaire that in-

20,21

cluded personal identifiers and elicited information
on demographic characteristics, personal and fam-
ily history of cancer and other diseases, and various
behavioral, environmental, occupational, and di-
etary exposures.

Over 99 percent of deaths that occurred from the
month of enrollment until September 1988 were as-
certained by means of personal inquiries made by
22
volunteers in September 1984, 1986, and 1988.
Approximately 93 percent of all deaths occurring
after September 1988 were ascertained by linkage
 By December 31,
with the National Death Index.
1998,  24.0  percent  of  the  participants  had  died,
75.8 percent were still living, and 0.2 percent were
dropped from follow-up on September 1, 1988, be-
cause of insufficient data for linkage with the Na-
tional Death Index. Death certificates or multiple
cause-of-death codes were obtained for 98.8 percent
of all known deaths.

22

In the base-line questionnaire, the participants
were asked their current weight, weight one year
previously, and height (without shoes). We excluded
from  the  analysis  participants  whose  values  for
height or weight were missing, whose weight one
year before the interview was unknown, or who had
lost more than 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the previous year;
65,436 men and 91,282 women were excluded for
these reasons. We also excluded participants with
below-normal weight according to World Health
Organization guidelines
 as indicated by a body-
mass index of less than 18.5 (3393 men and 15,769
women). In addition, we excluded participants who
had cancer (other than nonmelanoma skin cancer)
at base line (20,839 men and 47,120 women) and
those with missing information on race or smoking
history (14,086 men and 26,639 women). The eli-
gible participants for the current analysis included
404,576 men and 495,477 women. After 16 years of
follow-up, there were a total of 32,303 deaths from
cancer in men and 24,842 deaths from cancer in
women in this population.

23

From the final population of 900,053 partici-
pants, we defined a subgroup of those who had nev-
er  smoked  (107,030  men  and  276,564  women).
Within this subgroup, there were a total of 5314
deaths from cancer among men and 11,648 among
women. This subgroup provided us with an oppor-
tunity to evaluate whether the association between
body-mass index and mortality was subject to re-
sidual confounding by smoking status for smok-
ing-related cancers.

1626

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

, 

24

2003

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

obesity and cancer mortality

23

body-mass index
The body-mass index, a measure of adiposity, was
categorized as follows: 18.5 to 24.9, 25.0 to 29.9,
30.0 to 34.9, 35.0 to 39.9, and 40.0 or more. These
categories  correspond  to  those  proposed  by  the
World Health Organization
 for “normal range,”
“grade 1 overweight,” “grade 2 overweight” (30.0
to 39.9), and “grade 3 overweight,” respectively.
For many analyses, especially for cancers in spe-
cific sites and among participants who had never
smoked, the upper categories of body-mass index
were combined, because of the small numbers. In
our analyses and discussion, we refer to the range
of 25.0 to 29.9 as corresponding to “overweight”
and to values of 30.0 or more as corresponding to
“obesity.”

In  all  primary  analyses,  the  body-mass  index
category of 18.5 to 24.9 (“normal range”) was con-
sidered  the  reference  group.  We  also  conducted
analyses in which we divided this group into two
categories of 18.5 to 22.9 and 23.0 to 24.9 and con-
sidered the lower category to be the reference group.

24

mortality end points
The end points in our analyses were deaths from all
cancers (codes 140.0 to 195.8 and 199.0 to 208.9 of
International Classification of Diseases,
Ninth Revision
the 
 
[ICD-9])
 and from cancers at selected sites. Spe-
cific cancers accounting for at least 150 deaths in
men and 150 deaths in women included esophageal
cancer (ICD-9 codes 150.0 to 150.9), stomach can-
cer (151.0 to 151.9), colorectal cancer (153.0 to
154.8), liver cancer (155.0 to 155.2), gallbladder
cancer (156.0 to 156.9), pancreatic cancer (157.0 to
157.9),  lung  cancer  (162.0  to  162.9),  melanoma
(172.0 to 172.9), breast cancer in women (174.0 to
174.9), cancer of the corpus and uterus, not other-
wise specified (179 and 182.0 to 182.8), cervical
cancer (180.0 to 180.9), ovarian cancer (183.0 to
183.9),  prostate  cancer  (185),  bladder  cancer
(188.0 to 188.9), kidney cancer (189.0 to 189.9),
brain cancer (191.0 to 191.9), non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma (202.0 to 202.9), multiple myeloma (203.0
to 203.8), and leukemia (204.0 to 208.9). All other
specific  cancers  that  contributed  to  total  deaths
from cancer but that caused fewer than 150 deaths
or were coded as unspecified (199.0 to 199.1) were
analyzed as a separate category of “other” cancers.
Approximately 11 percent of cancers in both men
and women fell into the “other” category. Of these,
45 percent had a specific (coded) site and caused
fewer  than  150  deaths  and  55  percent  had  a  site

that  was  coded  as  unspecified.  Data  regarding
cancer  subsites  or  histologic  findings  were  not
available.

information on covariates
Potential  confounders  included  in  data  analyses
were age (in single years), race (white, black, or
other), smoking status (never smoked, formerly
smoked, or currently smokes, with three categories
of cigarettes smoked per day: 0 to 19, 20, and more
than 20), education (less than high school, high-
school graduate, some college, or college graduate),
physical activity (none, slight, moderate, or heavy),
alcohol use (none, less than one drink per day, one
drink per day, or two or more drinks per day), mar-
ital status (not married or married), current aspirin
use (use or nonuse), a crude index of fat consump-
tion (estimated grams per week for 20 food items,
with  the  participants  divided  into  three  roughly
equal groups),
 and vegetable consumption (the
frequency per week of consumption of nine vege-
tables — not including potatoes — with partici-
pants divided into three roughly equal groups), and
status with respect to estrogen-replacement therapy
in women (never used, currently used, or formerly
used).

25

statistical analysis
Age-adjusted death rates were calculated for each
category  of  body-mass  index  and  were  directly
standardized  to the age distribution of the entire
male or female study population. Relative risks (the
age-adjusted death rate in a specific body-mass-
index category divided by the corresponding rate in
the reference category [18.50 to 24.99]) were com-
puted; the 95 percent confidence intervals used ap-
proximate variance formulas.

26,27

We also used Cox proportional-hazards model-
28
 to compute relative risks and to adjust for oth-
ing
er potential risk factors reported at base line. The
Cox models were stratified according to age at en-
rollment by the inclusion of age (in single years) in
the strata statement of the Cox model. The relative
risks we report are from the multivariate Cox mod-
els,  unless  otherwise  noted.  Tests  of  linear  trend
were performed by scoring the categories of body-
mass index, entering the score as a continuous term
in the regression model, and testing the significance
of the term by the Wald chi-square test.

29

We present results for all cancers combined and
for cancer at each site on the basis of analyses of the
total populations of men and women. For most in-

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

24, 2003

1627

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 new england journal 

The

 medicine
of

Table 1. Mortality from Cancer According to Body-Mass Index among U.S. Men in the Cancer Prevention Study II, 1982 through 1998.*

Type of Cancer

Body-Mass Index†

P for Trend

18.5–24.9

25.0–29.9

30.0–34.9

35.0–39.9

≥40.0

All cancers

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

All cancers

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Esophageal cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Stomach cancer
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Colorectal cancer
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Liver cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Gallbladder cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Pancreatic cancer
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Lung cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Melanoma

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Prostate cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Bladder cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Kidney cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

13,855

578.30
1.00

13,855

578.30
1.00

329
13.97
1.00

388
16.24
1.00

1,292

53.51
1.00

222

9.24
1.00

66
2.68
1.00

740
31.07
1.00

4,885

206.69
1.00

238
10.02
1.00

1,681

67.36
1.00

375
15.19
1.00

305
12.83
1.00

15,372

546.21

0.97 (0.94–0.99)

15,372

546.21

0.97 (0.94–0.99)

2683
636.30

1.09 (1.05–1.14)

350
738.69

1.20 (1.08–1.34)

43
841.62

1.52 (1.13–2.05)

2683
636.30

1.09 (1.05–1.14)

393¶
749.86¶

1.23 (1.11–1.36)¶

452
15.74

1.15 (0.99–1.32)

81
18.07

1.28 (1.00–1.63)

14
24.18

1.63 (0.95–2.80)

455
16.09

1.01 (0.88–1.16)

84
20.34

1.20 (0.94–1.52)

18
33.99

1.94 (1.21–3.13)

1,811

64.43

1.20 (1.12–1.30)

337
79.50

1.47 (1.30–1.66)

54
101.25

1.84 (1.39–2.41)

296
10.49

1.13 (0.94–1.34)

78
19.22

1.90 (1.46–2.47)

24
47.80

4.52 (2.94–6.94)

94
3.37

1.34 (0.97–1.84)

20
5.16

1.76 (1.06–2.94)

961
33.98

1.13 (1.03–1.25)

182
42.20

1.41 (1.19–1.66)

25
48.80

1.49 (0.99–2.22)

4,281

150.11

0.78 (0.75–0.82)

279

9.77

0.95 (0.80–1.13)

1,971

73.02

1.08 (1.01–1.15)

681
156.53

0.79 (0.73–0.86)

78
149.63

0.67 (0.54–0.84)

43
8.09

0.85 (0.61–1.18)

311
83.00

1.20 (1.06–1.36)

41
87.35

1.34 (0.98–1.83)

421
15.47

1.03 (0.89–1.18)

76
16.69

1.14 (0.88–1.46)

437
15.25

1.18 (1.02–1.37)

81
18.50

1.36 (1.06–1.74)

14
24.84

1.70 (0.99–2.92)

0.001

0.002

0.008

0.03

<0.001

<0.001

0.02

<0.001

<0.001

0.32

<0.001

0.36

0.002

1628

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

, 

24

2003

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

obesity and cancer mortality

18.5–24.9

25.0–29.9

30.0–34.9

35.0–39.9

≥40.0

Body-Mass Index†

P for Trend

370
15.98
1.00

518
21.51
1.00

259
10.77
1.00

546
22.51
1.00

1,641

68.72
1.00

461
15.86

0.98 (0.85–1.13)

68
12.76

0.79 (0.61–1.03)

672
24.04

1.08 (0.96–1.21)

147
35.25

1.56 (1.29–1.87)

18
33.22

1.49 (0.93–2.39)

368
13.18

1.18 (1.01–1.39)

70
16.88

1.44 (1.10–1.89)

11
20.62

1.71 (0.93–3.14)

720
25.60

1.14 (1.02–1.28)

128
30.40

1.37 (1.13–1.67)

20
40.52

1.70 (1.08–2.66)

1,693

59.81

0.89 (0.83–0.95)

320
73.29

1.06 (0.94–1.20)

52
101.88

1.29 (0.98–1.71)

0.14

<0.001

0.002

<0.001

0.98

Table 1. (Continued.)

Type of Cancer

Brain cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Multiple myeloma
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Leukemia

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

All other cancers
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

* Participants with any of the following features at study entry were excluded: missing data on height or current weight; unknown weight one 
year before entry; weight loss at least 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the previous year; body-mass index under 18.50; existing cancer (other than nonmela-
noma skin cancer); unknown race or missing data; and missing data on smoking status. RR denotes relative risk, and CI confidence interval.
† The highest body-mass-index category examined varies for cancer at different sites; higher categories have been combined when necessary 

because of small numbers.

‡ The rate per 100,000 is given, standardized to the age distribution of men in the Cancer Prevention Study II.
§ The Cox proportional-hazards model was adjusted for age, education, smoking status and number of cigarettes smoked, physical activity, 

alcohol use, marital status, race, aspirin use, fat consumption, and vegetable consumption.

¶This value is for the 35.0–39.9 and ≥40.0 groups combined and is provided to facilitate comparison with the types of cancer.

dividual cancer sites, the association of body-mass
index and mortality was similar whether the analy-
sis was based on the total population or on the pop-
ulation of those who had never smoked. However,
for several cancers known to be related to smoking,
the association between body-mass index and mor-
tality was substantially different in the total popu-
lation and the population of those who had never
smoked. For these cancers (in men, all cancers, lung
cancer, esophageal cancer, pancreatic cancer, and
other cancers; in women, all cancers, lung cancer,
esophageal cancer, and other cancers), the results
from the population of those who had never smoked
are also presented.

Because weight is a modifiable risk factor, we
calculated the population attributable fraction (also
termed population attributable risk, population at-
30
tributable–risk proportion, and excess fraction),

32

an estimate of the proportion of all cancer deaths in
the United States that might be avoided if the adult
population maintained a body-mass index in the
31
normal range. We used methods derived by Walter
and presented by Kleinbaum et al.
 for a multiple-
category  exposure.  In  this  analysis,  calculations
were  based  on  the  multivariate-adjusted  relative
risks for the total population in the Cancer Preven-
tion  Study  II  and  for  the  population  of  those  in
that study who had never smoked and on preva-
lence estimates of overweight and obesity in U.S.
men and women 50 to 69 years of age from the Na-
tional  Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey
  This  calculation  assumes  that
for  1999–2000.
the  relative-risk  estimates  associated  with  over-
weight and obesity that were observed in the cur-
rent study were causal and are generalizable to the
U.S. population.

33

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

24, 2003

1629

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 new england journal 

The

 medicine
of

Table 2. Mortality from Cancer According to Body-Mass Index among U.S.Women in the Cancer Prevention Study II, 1982 through 1998.*

Type of Cancer

Body-Mass Index†

P for Trend

18.5–24.9

25.0–29.9

30.0–34.9

35.0–39.9

≥40.0

14,779

329.30
1.00

7107
339.75

1.08 (1.05–1.11)

2254
382.62

1.23 (1.18–1.29)

517
419.59

1.32 (1.20–1.44)

185
522.51

1.62 (1.40–1.87)

<0.001

All cancers

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Esophageal cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Stomach cancer
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Colorectal cancer
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Liver cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Gallbladder cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Pancreatic cancer
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Lung cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Melanoma

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Breast cancer¶

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

112

2.56
1.00

304

6.87
1.00

56
2.68

1.20 (0.86–1.66)

21
2.90

1.39 (0.86–2.25)

134

6.37

0.89 (0.72–1.09)

57
9.88

1.30 (0.97–1.74)

13
9.85

1.08 (0.61–1.89)

1,706

38.67
1.00

906
43.28

1.10 (1.01–1.19)

312
53.81

1.33 (1.17–1.51)

67
56.14

1.36 (1.06–1.74)

21
63.11

1.46 (0.94–2.24)

200

4.53
1.00

159

3.57
1.00

952
21.47
1.00

3,693

81.48
1.00

166

3.65
1.00

96
4.54

1.02 (0.80–1.31)

37
6.34

1.40 (0.97–2.00)

12
7.52

1.68 (0.93–3.05)

86
4.15

1.12 (0.86–1.47)

59
7.79

2.13 (1.56–2.90)

490
23.24

1.11 (1.00–1.24)

154
26.20

1.28 (1.07–1.52)

35
27.70

1.41 (1.01–1.99)

19
51.65

2.76 (1.74–4.36)

1278

60.80

0.88 (0.83–0.94)

305
51.23

0.82 (0.72–0.92)

54
43.67

0.66 (0.50–0.86)

19
52.64

0.81 (0.52–1.28)

61
2.96

0.85 (0.63–1.14)

28
3.63

1.10 (0.73–1.66)

1,446

39.10
1.00

908
51.13

1.34 (1.23–1.46)

309
60.65

1.63 (1.44–1.85)

68
67.56

1.70 (1.33–2.17)

24
84.86

2.12 (1.41–3.19)

0.13

0.46

<0.001

0.04

<0.001

<0.001

<0.001

0.95

<0.001

<0.001

0.001

Cancer of the corpus and 
uterus, not other-
wise specified¿

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Cervical cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

333
10.68
1.00

80
1.73
1.00

225
15.68

1.50 (1.26–1.78)

105
26.05

2.53 (2.02–3.18)

25
30.16

2.77 (1.83–4.18)

16
60.83

6.25 (3.75–10.42)

54
2.63

1.38 (0.97–1.96)

16
2.73

1.23 (0.71–2.13)

14
7.81

3.20 (1.77–5.78)

1630

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

, 

24

2003

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

obesity and cancer mortality

18.5–24.9

25.0–29.9

30.0–34.9

35.0–39.9

≥40.0

Body-Mass Index†

P for Trend

873
27.88
1.00

180

4.21
1.00

243

5.43
1.00

467
10.26
1.00

576
13.02
1.00

341

7.71
1.00

574
13.05
1.00

437
31.44

1.15 (1.02–1.29)

126
31.85

1.16 (0.96–1.40)

49
44.49

1.51 (1.12–2.02)

83
3.93

1.02 (0.78–1.33)

34
4.82

1.34 (0.91–1.95)

153

7.35

1.33 (1.08–1.63)

55
9.24

1.66 (1.23–2.24)

12
9.56

1.70 (0.94–3.05)

10
30.14

4.75 (2.50–9.04)

213
10.27

1.02 (0.87–1.21)

64
10.68

1.10 (0.84–1.44)

12
6.35

0.74 (0.42–1.32)

327
15.48

1.22 (1.06–1.40)

88
14.99

1.20 (0.95–1.51)

38
24.09

1.95 (1.39–2.72)

187

8.87

1.12 (0.93–1.34)

72
12.28

1.47 (1.13–1.91)

20
12.88

1.44 (0.91–2.28)

282
13.53

1.05 (0.91–1.21)

83
14.17

1.12 (0.89–1.42)

18
12.72

0.93 (0.58–1.49)

1,582

35.70
1.00

801
38.15

1.11 (1.02–1.21)

239
40.61

1.20 (1.05–1.38)

61
51.99

1.47 (1.13–1.90)

22
69.19

1.83 (1.20–2.80)

0.001

0.21

<0.001

0.96

<0.001

0.004

0.53

<0.001

Table 2. (Continued.)

Type of Cancer

Ovarian cancer**
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Bladder cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Kidney cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Brain cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Multiple myeloma
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Leukemia

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

All other cancers
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

* Participants with any of the following features at study entry were excluded: missing data on height or current weight; unknown weight one 

year before entry; weight loss of at least 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the previous year; body-mass index under 18.50; existing cancer (other than nonmel-
anoma skin cancer); unknown race or missing data; and missing data on smoking status. RR denotes relative risk, and CI confidence interval.
† The highest body-mass-index category examined varies for different cancer sites; upper categories have been combined when necessary be-

cause of small numbers.

‡ The rate per 100,000 is given, standardized to the age distribution of women in the Cancer Prevention Study II.
§ The Cox proportional-hazards model was adjusted for age, education, smoking status and number of cigarettes smoked, physical activity, al-

cohol use, marital status, race, aspirin use, estrogen-replacement therapy, fat consumption, and vegetable consumption.

¶Women who were premenopausal or perimenopausal or whose menopausal status was unknown were excluded (147,583 women, with 871 

deaths).

¿ Women who had a hysterectomy were excluded (130,717 women, 25 deaths).
**Women who had either a hysterectomy or ovarian surgery were excluded (141,924 women, 389 deaths).

results

body-mass index and mortality
from cancer in the total population
of men and women
The numbers of deaths among men were sufficient
to permit only the death rates from all cancers to be

examined separately for the two highest body-mass-
index categories of 35.0 to 39.9 and 40.0 or more.
The relative risks of death for these categories, as
compared with the group of men of normal weight
(body-mass index, 18.5 to 24.9), were 1.20 (95 per-
cent confidence interval, 1.08 to 1.34) and 1.52 (95
percent confidence interval, 1.13 to 2.05), respec-

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

24, 2003

1631

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 new england journal 

The

 medicine
of

tively (Table 1). We observed significant positive lin-
ear trends in death rates with increasing body-mass
index for all cancers, esophageal cancer, stomach
cancer, colorectal cancer, liver cancer, gallbladder
cancer, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, kidney
cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, multiple myelo-
ma, and leukemia (Table 1). As compared with men
of normal weight, men with a body-mass index of
at least 35.0 had significantly elevated relative risks
of death from cancer, which ranged from 1.23 (95
percent confidence interval, 1.11 to 1.36) for death
from any cancer to 4.52 (95 percent confidence in-
terval, 2.94 to 6.94) for death from liver cancer (Ta-
ble 1). In the total population of men, a significant
inverse association was observed between body-
mass index and death from lung cancer. We did not
find significant associations between body-mass in-
dex and death from brain cancer, bladder cancer,
melanoma, or “other” cancers. Among men within
the normal weight range, those with a body-mass
index  of  23.0  to  24.9  were  not  at  higher  risk  for
death from cancer than the leanest men (those with
a body-mass index of 18.5 to 22.9), and the observed
associations in men were not larger when a leaner
group of men was used as the reference group (data
not shown).

The results for the total population of women
were similar. Women with a body-mass index of at
least 40.0 had a relative risk of death from any can-
cer of 1.62 (95 percent confidence interval, 1.40 to
1.87), as compared with women of normal weight
(Table 2). Significant positive linear trends in death
rates were observed for colorectal cancer, liver can-
cer, gallbladder cancer, pancreatic cancer, breast
cancer, cancer of the corpus and uterus, not oth-
erwise specified, cervical cancer, ovarian cancer,
kidney cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, multiple
myeloma, and “other” cancers (Table 2). The high-
est relative risk we observed was for death from uter-
ine cancer (relative risk, 6.25 for women with body-
mass index of at least 40.0; 95 percent confidence
interval, 3.75 to 10.42). As in men, a significant in-
verse  association  between  body-mass  index  and
death from lung cancer was seen in the total popu-
lation, which included smokers. Significant asso-
ciations with body-mass index were not observed
for death from esophageal cancer, stomach cancer,
melanoma, bladder cancer, brain cancer, or leuke-
mia. Although the results for total cancer mortality
in women were virtually unchanged when a leaner
reference group was used (body-mass index, 18.5 to
22.9), there were significant differences within the

normal weight range for cancers of the gallbladder,
breast, and corpus and uterus, resulting in larger
elevations in risk for these cancers throughout the
entire range of overweight and obesity as compared
with the leanest reference group (the relative risk of
death from gallbladder cancer for a body-mass in-
dex of at least 30.0 was 2.44 [95 percent confidence
interval, 1.73 to 3.44]; the relative risks of death
from breast and uterine cancers for a body-mass in-
dex of at least 40.0 were 2.32 [95 percent confidence
interval, 1.54 to 3.50] and 6.87 [95 percent confi-
dence interval, 4.09 to 11.55], respectively).

body-mass index and mortality
from cancer in men and women
who had never smoked

The association between body-mass index and death
from  several  smoking-related  cancers  changed
when the analysis was restricted to men who had
never smoked. The positive associations with death
from any cancer, esophageal cancer, pancreatic can-
cer, and “other” cancers were of greater magnitude
among those who had never smoked than in the
total population, and the apparent inverse associ-
ation  with  death  from  lung  cancer  disappeared
(Table 3).

As  in  men,  the  positive  association  between
body-mass index and death from any cancer, esoph-
ageal cancer, and “other” cancers became stronger
when the analysis was restricted to women who had
never smoked, and the seemingly protective effect
of high body-mass index on mortality from lung
cancer  was  attenuated  (Table  3).  Among  women
who had never smoked, the relative risk of death
from any cancer was 1.88 (95 percent confidence
interval, 1.56 to 2.27) for those with a body-mass
index of at least 40.0, as compared with women of
normal weight.

The relative risks of cancers for which we found
significant trends of increasing death rates with in-
creasing body-mass index are summarized for the
highest categories of body-mass index that we were
able to examine in men (Fig. 1) and women (Fig. 2).

population attributable fraction
We  estimated  the  proportion  of  all  deaths  from
cancer in the U.S. population that are attributable
to overweight and obesity to be from 4.2 percent to
14.2 percent among men and from 14.3 percent
to 19.8 percent among women (Table 4). The lower
estimates are based on relative risks for the entire
population, whereas the higher estimates are based

1632

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

, 

24

2003

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

obesity and cancer mortality

Table 3. Mortality from Cancer According to Body-Mass Index among U.S. Men and Women in the Cancer Prevention Study II Who Had Never 
Smoked, 1982 through 1998.*

Type of Cancer

Body-Mass Index†

P for Trend

18.5–24.9

25.0–29.9

30.0–34.9

35.0–39.9

≥40.0

Men

All cancers

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Esophageal cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Pancreatic cancer
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Lung cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

All other cancers
No. of deaths
Death rate‡
RR (95% CI)§

Women

All cancers

No. of deaths
Death rate¶
RR (95% CI)§

Esophageal cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate¶
RR (95% CI)§

Lung cancer

No. of deaths
Death rate¶
RR (95% CI)§

All other cancers
No. of deaths
Death rate¶
RR (95% CI)§

2119
303.08
1.00

2638
346.62

1.11 (1.05–1.18)

499
442.00

1.38 (1.24–1.52)

58
421.01

1.31 (1.01–1.70)

24
3.55
1.00

155
22.57
1.00

156
22.72
1.00

239
34.65
1.00

52
6.82

1.76 (1.08–2.86)

11
7.29

1.91 (0.92–3.96)

212
27.87

1.24 (1.01–1.54)

34
29.75

1.34 (0.92–1.95)

8
60.69

2.61 (1.27–5.35)

179
23.51

1.00 (0.80–1.24)

30
23.45

0.93 (0.63–1.39)

290
37.99

1.06 (0.89–1.26)

81
62.18

1.68 (1.30–2.18)

6158
241.14
1.00

3763
277.92

1.14 (1.09–1.18)

1327
330.21

1.33 (1.25–1.41)

288
356.84

1.40 (1.25–1.58)

112
485.06

1.88 (1.56–2.27)

29
1.08
1.00

476
18.71
1.00

689
26.69
1.00

23
1.62

1.49 (0.85–2.59)

14
2.82

2.64 (1.36–5.12)

224
16.40

0.85 (0.73–1.00)

78
19.18

0.99 (0.77–1.26)

17
17.51

0.81 (0.49–1.31)

440
31.63

1.17 (1.04–1.32)

146
36.24

1.30 (1.08–1.56)

34
42.88

1.54 (1.08–2.17)

16
72.92

2.51 (1.52–4.14)

<0.001

0.04

0.005

0.78

<0.001

<0.001

0.004

0.21

<0.001

* Participants with any of the following features at study entry were excluded: missing height or current weight; unknown weight one year before 
entry; weight loss of at least 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the previous year; body-mass index under 18.50; existing cancer (other than nonmelanoma skin 
cancer); and missing data on smoking status. RR denotes relative risk, and CI confidence interval.

† The highest body-mass-index category examined varies for different cancer sites; upper categories have been combined when necessary be-

cause of small numbers.

‡ The rate per 100,000 is given, standardized to the age distribution of men in the Cancer Prevention Study II.
§ The Cox proportional-hazards model was adjusted for age, education, physical activity, alcohol use, marital status, race, aspirin use, estrogen-

replacement therapy (in women), fat consumption, and vegetable consumption.

¶The rate per 100,000 is given, standardized to the age distribution of women in the Cancer Prevention Study II.

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

24, 2003

1633

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 new england journal 

The

 medicine
of

Prostate (≥35)

Men
1.34

)
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
I

M
B
 
t
s
e
h
g
h
(
 
r
e
c
n
a
C

i

 
f
o
 
e
p
y
T

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (≥35)

All cancers (≥40)

All other cancers (≥30)

Kidney (≥35)

Multiple myeloma (≥35)

Gallbladder (≥30)

Colon and rectum (≥35)

Esophagus (≥30)

Stomach (≥35)

Pancreas (≥35)

Liver (≥35)

0

1

1.49

1.52

1.68*

1.70

1.71

1.76

1.84

1.91*

1.94

2.61*

4.52

2
Relative Risk of Death (95% Confidence Interval)

4

3

5

6

7

Figure 1. Summary of Mortality from Cancer According to Body-Mass Index for U.S. Men in the Cancer Prevention 
Study II, 1982 through 1998.
For each relative risk, the comparison was between men in the highest body-mass-index (BMI) category (indicated in pa-
rentheses) and men in the reference category (body-mass index, 18.5 to 24.9). Asterisks indicate relative risks for men 
who never smoked. Results of the linear test for trend were significant (P≤0.05) for all cancer sites. 

on relative risks for those who never smoked. The
estimates based on relative risks among men and
women who never smoked (Table 4) do not describe
the fraction of deaths attributable to overweight and
obesity  among  this  population  only.  Rather,  they
are estimates of the fraction of deaths attributable
to overweight and obesity in the total U.S. popula-
tion,  on  the  assumption  that  the  relative  risks
among  those  who  never  smoked  offer  the  most
valid estimates of the true effect of overweight and
obesity on mortality from cancer.

discussion

The heaviest men and women (those with a body-
mass index of at least 40.0) in the large cohort we
studied prospectively had death rates from all can-
cers that were 52 percent and 62 percent higher, re-
spectively, than the rates in men and women of nor-
mal weight. This finding is consistent with those of
previous studies, but the magnitude of the effect is
somewhat larger.
 The stronger associations
we found probably reflect our ability to examine
deaths from cancer across a wider range of over-
weight and obesity than has been possible previ-
ously. It is also likely that the stronger associations

7,16,17

18,19

seen in our study reflect a greater effect of body-
mass index on mortality than on incidence of cancer
at some sites.
 These risk estimates are proba-
bly conservative, since they are based on the total
population, including current and former smokers.
Among women who never smoked, the relative risk
associated with a body-mass index of at least 40.0
was 88 percent; however, there were not enough
deaths among men in this category for us to deter-
mine the relative risk.

The proportion of all deaths from cancer that is
attributable to overweight and obesity in U.S. adults
50 years of age or older may be as high as 14 percent
in men and 20 percent in women. These estimates
are based on the relative risks in our study and the
current patterns of overweight and obesity in the
United States. Under the assumption that these re-
lations are causal, the public health implications for
the United States are profound: more than 90,000
deaths per year from cancer might be avoided if ev-
eryone  in  the  adult  population  could  maintain  a
body-mass index under 25.0 throughout life.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) has concluded that there is sufficient evi-
dence of a cancer-preventive effect of avoidance of
weight gain for cancers of the colon, breast (in post-

1634

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

, 

24

2003

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

obesity and cancer mortality

Women
1.44

1.46

1.51

1.68

1.88*

1.95

2.12

2.13

2.51*

2.64*

2.76

3.20

)
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
I

M
B
 
t
s
e
h
g
h
(
 
r
e
c
n
a
C

i

 
f
o
 
e
p
y
T

Multiple myeloma (≥35)

Colon and rectum (≥40)

Ovary (≥35)

Liver (≥35)

All cancers (≥40)

Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (≥35)

Breast (≥40)

Gallbladder (≥30)

All other cancers (≥40)

Esophagus (≥30)

Pancreas (≥40)

Cervix (≥35)

Kidney (≥40)

Uterus (≥40)

4.75

6.25

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Relative Risk of Death (95% Confidence Interval)

Figure 2. Summary of Mortality from Cancer According to Body-Mass Index for U.S. Women in the Cancer Prevention 
Study II, 1982 through 1998.
For each relative risk, the comparison was between women in the highest body-mass-index (BMI) category (indicated in 
parentheses) and women in the reference category (body-mass index, 18.5 to 24.9). Asterisks indicate relative risks for 
women who never smoked. Results of the linear test for trend were significant (P≤0.05) for all cancer sites.

11

11

menopausal women), endometrium, kidney (renal-
cell  carcinoma),  and  esophagus  (adenocarcino-
ma).
  Potential  biologic  mechanisms  include
increased levels of endogenous hormones (sex ster-
oids, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor I) as-
sociated with overweight and obesity and the contri-
bution of  abdominal  obesity  to  gastroesophageal
reflux and esophageal adenocarcinoma.
 Our study
supports the conclusion of the IARC. Moderate rel-
ative risks (less than 2.0) associated with overweight
and obesity both for colon cancer and for breast
cancer in postmenopausal women have been doc-
umented consistently in case–control and cohort
 Much higher relative risks have been
studies.
observed  for  uterine  cancer  (2  to  10)  and  kidney
cancer (1.5 to 4), and the increased risk of kidney
cancer associated with excess weight is higher in
women  than  in  men  in  this  and  most  previous
studies.
 Increases by a factor of two to three
in the risk of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus in
association with high body-mass index have been
reported,
 and the magnitude of this association
has been found by other investigators to be great-
 Because we could not examine
er in nonsmokers.

8,34,35

8,36,37

13,14

13

esophageal cancer according to subsite, the strong-
er association observed in participants who had nev-
er smoked may be partly explained by the greater
contribution of adenocarcinoma to all esophageal
cancer in nonsmokers than in smokers.

14

Recent studies of gallbladder cancer have con-
sistently found elevated risks for women with a high
body-mass index (by a factor of about two) but gen-
erally have involved too few cases for the associa-
 Obesity may
tion to be evaluated in men.
operate  indirectly  by  increasing  the  risk  of  gall-
stones, which, in turn, increase the risk of gallblad-
8
der cancer.

7,16,17,38,39

15,41

15,40,41

Studies  suggest  that  high  body-mass  index  is
associated  with  approximately  a  doubling  of  the
risk  of  pancreatic  cancer  in  both  men
  and
women
 — a result similar to our findings. In
contrast, there is no strong support for an associa-
tion between body-mass index and prostate can-
cer.
 However, some data suggest a slight in-
crease in the risk of advanced prostate cancer or
death among patients with a high body-mass in-
 Positive associations of ovarian cancer
dex.
with body-mass index have been found, with relative

19,45,46

42-44

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

24, 2003

1635

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 new england journal 

The

 medicine
of

Table 4. Estimated Population Attributable Fraction According to Body-Mass Index for Mortality from Cancer
in U.S. Men and Women.*

Body-Mass Index

Men

Women

Prevalence 
of Exposure

Relative 

Risk

Population 
Attributable 

Fraction

Prevalence 
of Exposure

Relative 

Risk

Population 
Attributable 

Fraction

%

42.1

21.0

9.2

3.6

42.1

21.0

12.8

0.97

1.09

1.20

1.52

1.11

1.38

1.31

All subjects

25.0–29.9

30.0–34.9

35.0–39.9

≥40.0

Total population attributable fraction

Subjects who never smoked

25.0–29.9

30.0–34.9

35.0–39.9†

≥40.0

Total population attributable fraction

%

–1.2

1.8

1.8

1.9

4.2

4.0

6.8

3.4

14.2

%

28.8

22.5

10.7

7.9

28.8

22.5

10.7

7.9

1.08

1.23

1.32

1.62

1.14

1.33

1.40

1.88

%

2.0

4.5

3.0

4.9

14.3

3.3

6.1

3.5

7.0

19.8

* Data on prevalence of exposure among men are from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 

(1999–2000) for U.S. men 50 to 69 years of age. Data on prevalence of exposure among women are from NHANES 
(1999–2000) for U.S. women 50 to 69 years of age. Data on relative risk are from the Cancer Prevention Study II (Table 1 
for data for all men, Table 2 for data for all women, and Table 3 for data for men and women who never smoked). The 
population attributable fraction was calculated with the use of equation 9.6 in Kleinbaum et al.

32

† Values for men are applicable to men with a body-mass index of 35.0 or higher.

risks in the range of 1.5 to 2.0 for the highest body-
mass-index categories studied
; however, sev-
16,17,50,51
eral studies have not shown an association.

7,47-49

16

16,17

13,14,52

Two studies that examined obesity and liver can-
cer found an excess risk in both men and women,
 — a
with relative risks in the range of 2.0 to 4.0
result similar to our findings. Our results and those
 suggest that this
of a prospective study in Sweden
excess risk is higher among men than among wom-
en. Obesity also increases the risk of adenocarcino-
ma of the gastric cardia,
 but the data are lim-
ited and inconsistent for noncardia cancers of the
stomach.
 In an earlier American Cancer Society
cohort, as in our study, mortality from stomach can-
cer  was  associated  with  body-mass  index  among
7
men but not among women.
 This difference may
reflect the greater contribution of the cardia to all
cases of gastric cancer in men than in women. Our
results for cervical cancer are also similar to those in
7
 where-
the earlier American Cancer Society cohort,

13,52

as the increased risks observed in two cohorts of
hospitalized patients with a diagnosis of obesity,
as  compared  with  the  general  population,  were
16,17
much smaller than those observed in our study.
Data are scarce on the relation between hematopoi-
etic cancers and body-mass index, and the findings
have not been consistent.

7,16,17,53

Our results are based on data on mortality and
reflect the combined influence of body-mass index
both  on  the  incidence  of  cancer  and  on  survival,
whereas most of the available literature on site-spe-
cific cancers is based on incidence data. Our results
may be influenced by adiposity-related differences
in the diagnosis or treatment of cancer, as well as by
true biologic effects of adiposity on survival. For ex-
ample, adiposity has been shown to be adversely as-
sociated with the incidence of breast cancer, survival
among women with the disease,
 and stage at di-
 These combined effects may explain
agnosis.
why the association of body-mass index with mor-

55,56

54

1636

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

, 

24

2003

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.  

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

obesity and cancer mortality

tality from breast cancer in our study cohort is some-
what stronger than those in previous studies of in-
cident breast cancer.

18

Smoking profoundly alters the relation between
body-mass index and many causes of death. We be-
lieve that public health recommendations regarding
optimal body mass are most valid when they are
based on data from studies of persons who have
never smoked.5,57,58 For smoking-related cancers,
the prospective effects of body-mass index on the
risk of death among smokers cannot be separated
from the prospective effects of smoking — namely,
decreased body mass and increased risk of death.
Previous analyses of the Cancer Prevention Study II
cohort demonstrated that the apparent inverse as-
sociation of body-mass index and mortality due to
lung cancer was incrementally attenuated with in-
creasingly complex statistical control for smoking
in multivariate models, and it disappeared entirely
when the analysis was restricted to those who had
never smoked.59 Thus, for smoking-related can-
cers, we believe that the estimates of relative risk
and population attributable fraction presented for
the total population (Tables 1, 2, and 4) are likely
to be underestimates, whereas those presented for
the population of those who never smoked (Tables 3
and 4) offer the most valid estimates of the true ef-
fect  of  overweight  and  obesity  on  mortality  from
these cancers.

We used self-reported weight and height at study
entry to calculate the body-mass index, a widely used
index of weight adjusted for height.60,61 Although

self-reported weight and height are highly correlat-
ed with measured weight and height,62-64 the small
error  that  exists  is  generally  systematic,  with  an
overestimation of height and an underestimation
of weight, especially at higher weights.62-64 Thus,
our measure of body-mass index probably under-
estimated the true body-mass-index values among
overweight persons. We had no direct measure of
adiposity or of lean body mass and no measure of
central adiposity, such as the waist-to-hip ratio. We
also could not evaluate the effect of weight change
or weight cycling throughout the follow-up period,
and we could not estimate the extent of misclassifi-
cation that weight change might introduce. The as-
sociations observed in this study were not changed
in models that excluded deaths in the first two years
of follow-up.

The large size of our cohort allowed us to inves-
tigate the effect of overweight and obesity on the
occurrence  of  57,000  deaths  from  cancer  among
900,000 men and women who were free of cancer
at base line. Overweight and obesity are associated
with  the  risk  of  death  from  all  cancers  and  with
death from cancers at many specific sites. From our
results, we estimate that 90,000 deaths due to cancer
could be prevented each year in the United States if
men and women could maintain normal weight. It
is unlikely that this goal can be achieved without
concerted effort and substantial investment on the
part of policymakers, educators, clinicians, employ-
ers, and schools to promote physical activity and
healthful dietary practices as a cultural norm.

references

1. Manson JE, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, et
al. Body weight and mortality among wom-
en. N Engl J Med 1995;333:677-85.
2. Willett WC, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ,
et al. Weight, weight change, and coronary
heart disease in women: risk within the ‘nor-
mal’ weight range. JAMA 1995;273:461-5.
3. Stevens J, Plankey MW, Williamson DF,
et al. The body mass index-mortality relation-
ship in white and African American women.
Obes Res 1998;6:268-77.
4. Lindsted KD, Singh PN. Body mass and
26 y risk of mortality among men who never
smoked: a re-analysis of men from the Ad-
ventist  Mortality  Study.  Int  J  Obes  Relat
Metab Disord 1998;22:544-8.
5. Calle EE, Thun MJ, Petrelli JM, Rodriguez
C, Heath CW Jr. Body-mass index and mor-
tality in a prospective cohort of U.S. adults.
N Engl J Med 1999;341:1097-105.
6. Kopelman P. Obesity as a medical prob-
lem. Nature 2000;404:635-43.

7. Lew EA, Garfinkel L. Variations in mor-
tality  by  weight  among  750,000  men  and
women. J Chronic Dis 1979;32:563-76.
8. World Cancer Research Fund. Food, nu-
trition and the prevention of cancer: a global
perspective. Washington, D.C.: American In-
stitute for Cancer Research, 1997:371-3.
9. Carroll K. Obesity as a risk factor for cer-
tain types of cancer. Lipids 1998;33:1055-9.
10. Bergstrom A, Pisani P, Tenet V, Wolk A,
Adami  H-O.  Overweight  as  an  avoidable
cause of cancer in Europe. Int J Cancer 2001;
91:421-30. [Erratum, Int J Cancer 2001;92:
927.]
11. IARC handbooks of cancer prevention.
Vol. 6. Weight control and physical activity.
Lyons, France: International Agency for Re-
search on Cancer, 2002.
12. Peto J. Cancer epidemiology in the last
century and the next decade. Nature 2001;
411:390-5.
13. Chow W-H, Blot WJ, Vaughan TL, et al.

Body mass index and risk of adenocarcino-
mas  of  the  esophagus  and  gastric  cardia.
J Natl Cancer Inst 1998;90:150-5.
14. Vaughan TL, Davis S, Kristal A, Thomas
DB.  Obesity,  alcohol,  and  tobacco  as  risk
factors for cancers of the esophagus and gas-
tric  cardia:  adenocarcinoma  versus  squa-
mous  cell  carcinoma.  Cancer  Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1995;4:85-92.
15. Michaud DS, Giovannucci E, Willett WC,
Colditz  G,  Stampfer  M,  Fuchs  C.  Physical
activity, obesity, height, and the risk of pan-
creatic cancer. JAMA 2001;286:921-9.
16. Wolk A, Gridley G, Svensson M, et al.
A prospective study of obesity and cancer
risk (Sweden). Cancer Causes Control 2001;
12:13-21.
17. Moller  H,  Mellemgaard  A,  Lindvig  K,
Olsen  J.  Obesity  and  cancer  risk:  a  Danish
record-linkage  study.  Eur  J  Cancer  1994;
30A:344-50.
18. Petrelli JM, Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Thun

n engl j med 

348;17

www.nejm.org april 

24, 2003

1637

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. obesity and cancer mortality

MJ. Body mass index, height, and postmeno-
pausal breast cancer mortality in a prospec-
tive  cohort  of  US  women.  Cancer  Causes
Control 2002;13:325-32.
19. Rodriguez C, Patel AV, Calle EE, Jacobs
EJ,  Chao  A,  Thun  MJ.  Body  mass  index,
height, and prostate cancer mortality in two
large  cohorts  of  adult  men  in  the  United
States.  Cancer  Epidemiol  Biomarkers  Prev
2001;10:345-53.
20. Garfinkel  L.  Selection,  follow-up,  and
analysis in the American Cancer Society pro-
spective studies: In: Selection, follow-up, and
analysis in prospective studies: a workshop.
National Cancer Institute monograph 67. Be-
thesda, Md.: National Cancer Institute, 1985:
49-52. (NIH publication no. 85-2713.)
21. Stellman SD, Garfinkel L. Smoking hab-
its and tar levels in a new American Cancer
Society prospective study of 1.2 million men
and  women.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst  1986;76:
1057-63.
22. Calle EE, Terrell DD. Utility of the Na-
tional Death Index for ascertainment of mor-
tality among Cancer Prevention Study II par-
ticipants. Am J Epidemiol 1993;137:235-41.
23. Physical status: the use and interpreta-
tion of anthropometry: report of a WHO Ex-
pert Committee. World Health Organ 1995;
854:1-452.
24. International classification of diseases:
manual of the international statistical classi-
fication of diseases, injuries, and causes of
death. Vol. 1. Geneva: World Health Organi-
zation, 1977.
25. Thun MJ, Calle EE, Namboodiri MM, et
al. Risk factors for fatal colon cancer in a
large  prospective  study.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst
1992;84:1491-500.
26. Flanders WD. Approximate variance for-
mulas for standardized rate ratios. J Chronic
Dis 1984;37:449-53.
27. Rothman KJ, Greenland S. Modern epi-
demiology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–
Raven, 1998.
28. Cox  DR.  Regression  models  and  life-
tables. J R Stat Soc [B] 1972;34:187-220.
29. Cox  DR,  Oakes  D.  Analysis  of  survival
data. London: Chapman & Hall, 1984.
30. Rockhill B, Newman B, Weinberg C. Use
and misuse of population attributable frac-
tions. Am J Public Health 1998;88:15-9.
31. Walter SD. The estimation and interpre-
tation of attributable risk in health research.
Biometrics 1976;32:829-49.
32. Kleinbaum  DG,  Kupper  LL,  Morgen-
stern H. Epidemiologic research: principles
and quantitative methods. Belmont, Calif.:
Lifetime Learning, 1982:163.
33. National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Survey 1999-2000. Atlanta: Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2002.
(Accessed  April  1,  2003,  at  http://

www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/nhanes/
NHANES99_00.htm.)
34. Hunter  DJ,  Willett  WC.  Nutrition  and
breast cancer. Cancer Causes Control 1996;
7:56-68.
35. Potter JD. Nutrition and colorectal can-
cer. Cancer Causes Control 1996;7:127-46.
36. Hill  HA,  Austin  H.  Nutrition  and  en-
dometrial  cancer.  Cancer  Causes  Control
1996;7:19-32.
37. Wolk A, Lindblad P, Adami H-O. Nutri-
tion  and  renal  cell  cancer.  Cancer  Causes
Control 1996;7:5-18.
38. Strom BL, Soloway RD, Rios-Dalenz JL,
et  al.  Risk  factors  for  gallbladder  cancer:
an international collaborative case-control
study. Cancer 1995;76:1747-56.
39. Zatonski WA, Lowenfels AB, Boyle P, et
al. Epidemiologic aspects of gallbladder can-
cer: a case-control study of the SEARCH Pro-
gram  of  the  International  Agency  for  Re-
search on Cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;
89:1132-8.
40. Gapstur SM, Gann PH, Lowe W, Liu K,
Colangelo L, Dyer A. Abnormal glucose me-
tabolism  and  pancreatic  cancer  mortality.
JAMA 2000;283:2552-8.
41. Silverman DT, Swanson CA, Gridley G,
et  al.  Dietary  and  nutritional  factors  and
pancreatic  cancer:  a  case-control  study
based  on  direct  interviews.  J  Natl  Cancer
Inst 1998;90:1710-9.
42. Kolonel LN. Nutrition and prostate can-
cer. Cancer Causes Control 1996;7:83-94.
43. Calle  E.  Do  anthropometric  measures
predict risk of prostate cancer? Am J Epide-
miol 2000;151:550-3.
44. Nomura A. Body size and prostate can-
cer. Epidemiol Rev 2001;23:126-31.
45. Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ,
Colditz  GA,  Willett  WC.  Height,  body
weight, and risk of prostate cancer. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1997;6:557-63.
46. Andersson SO, Wolk A, Bergstrom R, et
al. Body size and prostate cancer: a 20-year
follow-up study among 135006 Swedish con-
struction workers. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;
89:385-9.
47. Farrow DC, Weiss NS, Lyon JL, Daling
JR. Association of obesity and ovarian cancer
in a case-control study. Am J Epidemiol 1989;
129:1300-4.
48. Cramer DW, Welch WR, Hutchinson GB,
Willett W, Scully RE. Dietary animal fat in re-
lation to ovarian cancer risk. Obstet Gynecol
1984;63:833-8.
49. Purdie DM, Bain CJ, Webb PM, White-
man DC, Pirozzo S, Green AC. Body size and
ovarian cancer: case-control study and sys-
tematic  review  (Australia).  Cancer  Causes
Control 2001;12:855-63.
50. Mink PJ, Folsom AR, Sellers TA, Kushi
LH. Physical activity, waist-to-hip ratio, and

other risk factors for ovarian cancer: a fol-
low-up study of older women. Epidemiolo-
gy 1996;7:38-45.
51. Slattery  ML,  Schuman  KL,  West  DW,
French  TK,  Robison  LM.  Nutrient  intake
and  ovarian  cancer.  Am  J  Epidemiol  1989;
130:497-502.
52. Ji B-T, Chow W-H, Yang G, et al. Body
mass  index  and  the  risk  of  cancers  of  the
gastric cardia and distal stomach in Shang-
hai,  China.  Cancer  Epidemiol  Biomarkers
Prev 1997;6:481-5.
53. Holly  EA,  Lele  C,  Bracci  PM,  McGrath
MS.  Case-control  study  of  non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma among women and heterosexual
men in the San Francisco Bay area, Califor-
nia. Am J Epidemiol 1999;150:375-89.
54. Boyd  NF,  Campbell  JE,  Germanson  T,
Thomson  DB,  Sutherland  DJ,  Meakin  JW.
Body weight and prognosis in breast cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;67:785-9.
55. Reeves  MJ,  Newcomb  PA,  Remington
PL, Marcus PM, MacKenzie WR. Body mass
and  breast  cancer:  relationship  between
method  of  detection  and  stage  of  disease.
Cancer 1996;77:301-7.
56. Wee CC, McCarthy EP, Davis RB, Phil-
lips  RS.  Screening  for  cervical  and  breast
cancer: is obesity an unrecognized barrier to
preventive care? Ann Intern Med 2000;132:
697-704.
57. Willett  WC,  Dietz  WH,  Colditz  GA.
Guidelines for healthy weight. N Engl J Med
1999;341:427-34.
58. Allison  DB,  Fontaine  KR,  Manson  JE,
Stevens  J,  VanItallie  TB.  Annual  deaths  at-
tributable  to  obesity  in  the  United  States.
JAMA 1999;282:1530-8.
59. Henley SJ, Flanders WD, Manatunga A,
Thun  MJ.  Leanness  and  lung  cancer  risk:
fact or artifact? Epidemiology 2002;13:268-
76.
60. Kuczmarski RJ, Carroll MD, Flegal KM,
Troiano RP. Varying body mass index cutoff
points  to  describe  overweight  prevalence
among  U.S.  adults:  NHANES  III  (1988  to
1994). Obes Res 1997;5:542-8.
61. Willett  WC.  Nutritional  epidemiology.
2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press,
1998.
62. Palta M, Prineas RJ, Berman R, Hannan
P.  Comparison  of  self-reported  and  meas-
ured  height  and  weight.  Am  J  Epidemiol
1982;115:223-30.
63. Stewart AW, Jackson RT, Ford MA, Bea-
glehole R. Underestimation of relative weight
by  use  of  self-reported  height  and  weight.
Am J Epidemiol 1987;125:122-6.
64. Stevens J, Keil JE, Waid R, Gazes PC. Ac-
curacy  of  current,  4-year,  and  28-year  self-
reported body weight in an elderly popula-
tion. Am J Epidemiol 1990;132:1156-63.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.

1638

n engl j med 348;17 www.nejm.org april 24, 2003

The New England Journal of Medicine Downloaded from nejm.org at UNIVERSITY OF OTTAWA on June 11, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.  Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. DIABETES/METABOLISM RESEARCH AND REVIEWS
Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
Published online in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/dmrr.2395

R E V I E W A RT I C L E

Common mechanisms of dysfunctional adipose
tissue and obesity-related cancers

P. Matafome1,2*
D. Santos-Silva1
C. M. Sena1
R. Seiça1

1Laboratory of Physiology and IBILI,
Faculty of Medicine,
University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal
2Center of Ophthalmology and IBILI,
Faculty of Medicine,
University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal

*Correspondence to: P. Matafome,
Laboratory of Physiology and IBILI,
Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, Sub-unit 1, 1st ﬂoor,
Azinhaga de Santa Comba, Celas,
3000-354, Coimbra, Portugal.
E-mail: paulomatafome@gmail.com

Received: 10 August 2011
Revised: 7 June 2012
Accepted: 24 January 2013

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Summary

The relation between cancer and metabolic disorders was recognized several
decades ago, but the underlying mechanisms involved in cancer development
and progression remain obscure. In the last years, many groups have been
studying systemic adipose tissue markers in cancer patients. However, few con-
sistent results were obtained. On the other hand, several studies revealed
many aspects of adipose tissue physiology in obesity. Nowadays,
is
recognized that excessive lipid uptake in adipocytes leads to hypertrophy and
consequently to metabolic dysregulation, hypoxia,
impaired
adipocytokine expression and angiogenesis, insulin resistance and macrophage
recruitment. In obese patients, tumours commonly colocalize with excessive
adipose tissue accumulation, and most of the features of hypertrophic adipose
tissue are observed in cancer patients, namely breast and colon. This
review aimed to summarize pathological adipose tissue alterations that may
contribute to cancer aetiology and development. Copyright © 2013 John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd.

inﬂammation,

it

Keywords

adipose tissue; cancer; obesity

Abbreviations ABCA1, ATP-binding cassette A1; ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase;
acetyl-CoA, acetyl-coenzyme A; AMPK, AMP-activated kinase; bFGF, basic
ﬁbroblast growth factor; BMI, body mass index; BRCA1, breast cancer 1;
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CPT-1, carnitine palmitoyl transferase
1; CSF-1, colony-stimulating factor 1; CRP, C-reactive protein; EGF, epidermal
growth factor; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ER, oestrogen receptor;
FATP, fatty acid transport protein; FAS, fatty acid synthase; FFA, free fatty acid;
GLUT, glucose transporter type; HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin; HB-EGF,
heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor;
HIF-1, hypoxia-inducible factor 1; HSL, hormone-sensitive lipase; HUVEC,
human umbilical vein endothelial cells; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1;
IGFBP, insulin-like growth factor binding protein; IGFR, insulin-like growth
factor receptor; IkBa, inhibitor of NF-kB; IKK, IkBa kinase; IL-6, interleukin
6; IRS-1, insulin receptor substrate 1; JAK, Janus kinase; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal
kinase; LPL,
lipoprotein lipase; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase;
Malonyl-CoA, malonyl-coenzyme A; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1;
MCPIP, monocyte chemoattractant protein-induced protein; MMP, matrix
metalloproteinase; MSC, mesenchymal stem cells; NF-kB, nuclear factor kappa
B; NO, nitric oxide; Ob-Rb, leptin receptor; PAI-1, plasminogen activator
inhibitor 1; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PI3K, phosphoinositide
3-kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PKA, protein kinase A; PPAR, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor; PPRE, peroxisome proliferator response
element; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acid; SOCS, suppressor of cytokine
signalling; SREBP1c, sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c; SR-1,
scavenger receptor 1; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription;
RANTES/CCL5, chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 5; ROS, reactive oxygen
species; TAM, tumour-associated macrophage; TGF-b, transforming growth

286

P. Matafome et al.

factor beta; TNF-a, tumour necrosis factor alpha; TLR4,
toll-like receptor 4; TZD,
thiazolidinedione; uPA,
urokinase
vascular
endothelial cell; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor

activator; VEC,

plasminogen

Epidemiology

The link between metabolic disorders and cancer was
proposed more than 80 years ago and is still under intense
investigation. The prevalence of obesity is rapidly increasing
worldwide; 71% of US men and 62% of US women are
overweight or obese. In Europe, metabolic syndrome affects
individuals, and this will
25–31% of
further increase
because of
the increasing prevalence of obesity in
children and young adults [1–4]. Obesity increases the
risk of multiple health conditions, including diabetes,
hypertension and cancer. However, BMI does not
distinguish adipose tissue from other tissues, nor does
it inform fat distribution [1–4].

Epidemiological studies have shown that high BMI
values were strongly associated with increased incidence
of several types of cancer and also premalignant lesions
[5,6]. However, colorectal cancer was shown to be more
strongly associated with waist circumference and visceral
adipose tissue [1,7]. This link is stronger in men because
they have more visceral fat. However, when considering
waist circumference (marker of visceral obesity), differences
between sexes disappear [1,7–11]. Women and men with
waist circumferences >99 and 101 cm, respectively, have
50% higher colon cancer risk [1,7,8,10].
In addition,
infantile obesity was also demonstrated to increase colon
cancer risk in adult life [9,12]. On the other hand, gastric
bypass surgery was shown to decrease the risk of cancer
mortality [13]. In postmenopausal women, obesity has
been associated with higher incidence of breast cancer,
reduced likelihood of survival and increased likelihood of
recurrence [9].

Adipose tissue in obesity and cancer

Adipose tissue contains several cell
types including
adipocytes, preadipocytes, ﬁbroblasts, endothelial cells
and resident macrophages, which produce a broad range
of cytokines, adipocytokines and growth factors, such as
adiponectin, leptin, resistin, visfatin, VEGF, PAI-1, MCP-1
or TNF-a (Figures 1 and 2) [3,9,11,14,15]. Recent studies
correlated pathological
alterations with adipocyte
hypertrophy, rather than hyperplasia. During adipocyte
hypertrophy, activation of NF-kB leads to inactivation of
PPARg and insulin receptor. This conduces to decreased
lipid and glucose uptake, adiponectin secretion and adipo-
genesis. In addition, increased expression of inﬂammatory,
chemoattractant, growth and matrix remodelling factors is
also observed (Figure 2) [1,9,11,15–17]. Consequently, FFAs
accumulate in other tissues such as liver and muscle, causing
hepatic and peripheral lipotoxicity and insulin resistance [18,19].

During this process, adipose tissue localization appears
to be critical. As already discussed, visceral adiposity
has been considered a major risk factor for metabolic
syndrome and apparently for cancer.

It has been suggested that adipose tissue may support
tumour cell growth. Adipose tissue-derived factors have
been shown to inﬂuence the behaviour of tumour cells.
Mature adipocytes promote proliferation of tumour cells
in tridimensional cultures, and adipocyte-conditioned
medium also promotes tumour cell invasion and prolifera-
tion [20]. Further, Carter and Church recently demonstrated
that conditioned medium of adipocytes isolated from breast
adipose tissue increased cell motility of both normal and
malignant breast epithelial cells [21]. In mice, simultaneous
(but not separate) injection of tumoral cells with adipose
tissue results in tumour formation and metastasis [14]. In
addition, Hirose and co-workers showed that db/db mice,
which have hyperleptinaemia and hyperinsulinaemia, have
an increased susceptibility to colon premalignant lesions
induced by azoxymethane [22]. Authors from the same
laboratory also showed that these effects were prevented
by antioxidants [23,24]. Despite the fact that the model
used on these studies has hyperleptinaemia, Aparicio and
colleagues showed that leptin may reduce the development
of premalignant lesions in the colon [25]. Thus, besides
increasing tumour progression, obesity and diabetes
apparently contribute to increased formation of premalignant
lesions, but the role of the different players is still unknown.
The formation of hypoxic regions has a major effect on
cell metabolism. Thus,
it is expected that metabolic
intermediates resulting from hypertrophy may somehow
regulate angiogenesis. In the last decades, many studies
have shown that inﬂammation is the link between them.
Cells respond to metabolic alterations by mechanisms
involved in innate immunity, activating inﬂammatory
pathways [18,19]. Besides resulting in insulin resistance,
this also contributes to angiogenesis. Inﬂammation and
angiogenesis
share common pathways, as most of
cytokines and adipocytokines have pro-angiogenic effects,
contributing to tissue irrigation and also to cancer
progression [9,18–20]. Moreover, both adipose tissue
and tumours recruit macrophages, whereas the tumour
also recruits adipose stroma cells, showing a strong
relation between adipose tissue and the tumour [8]. The
integration of such mechanisms in adipose tissue and
tumour physiology will be discussed in the following
sections.

Metabolic dysregulation in adipose
tissue and tumour cells

Dysregulation of lipid metabolism
Adipocyte hypertrophy results in the accumulation of
secondary metabolites (such as long-chain acetyl-CoA or
diacylglycerol) involved in the activation of several stress and
inﬂammatory pathways, consequently leading to insulin
resistance and triglyceride hydrolysis (Figure 2) [19,26–28].
Like adipocytes, macrophages have the ability to change

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

Adipose Tissue Dysfunction and Cancer

287

Figure 1. Schematic representation of adipose tissue localization in relation to tumours, common in breast or colon cancer. Adipocyte
hypertrophy correlates with increased expression of inﬂammatory mediators and macrophage inﬁltration, common features of obesity-
related cancer. Furthermore, macrophage inﬁltration contributes to collagen deposition and tumour cell migration to the blood

Figure 2. Metabolic, endocrine and inﬂammatory alterations in hypertrophic adipocytes. Hypertrophy is characterized by excessive
cytoplasmatic accumulation of FFAs and hypoxia, leading to activation of inﬂammatory and stress pathways and inactivation of
insulin signalling. These mechanisms involve increased TNF-a, MCP-1, VEGF, resistin and leptin and decreased adiponectin
expression, contributing to increased macrophage inﬁltration. Tissue macrophages regulate matrix degradation and collagen
deposition. These mechanisms constitute a hypoxia feedback mechanism to increase angiogenesis and inhibit continuous adipocyte
growth, decreasing hypoxia. However, most of angiogenic and chemoattractant mediators and macrophages also regulate tumour
growth

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

288

P. Matafome et al.

lipids,
their phenotype and store large amounts of
leading to foam cell formation, which are common in
hypertrophic adipose tissue. These macrophages have
an increased inﬂammatory potential, creating a positive
inﬂammatory loop in adipose tissue [9]. Importantly,
PPARg controls lipid storage in both adipocytes and
macrophages but is inactivated by such inﬂammatory
pathways (Figure 2). On the other hand, the amount
of lipids that the adipocyte has to process and store
depends on the ability of peripheral organs to oxidize
fatty acids, which is mainly controlled by AMPK
[1,9,11,29,30].

PPARg and diet regulation. PPARg is a nuclear receptor and
transcription factor activated mostly by lipids, increasing
the expression of several proteins involved in fatty acid
uptake and storage [11,15,30] (Figure 2). Furthermore,
PPARg directly inhibits nuclear translocation of the NF-k
B, thereby inhibiting the expression of cytokines and other
inﬂammatory mediators [11,15,30,31]. Although most tu-
mour cells express PPARg, it has not been yet established
whether its expression is related to tumour differentiation
and metastasis [1]. PPARg ligands,
including TZDs, are
known to inhibit proliferation of cancer cells, increasing nu-
clear levels of tumour suppressor BRCA1 [1,14]. Positive
effects of PPARg activators on cancer progression may also
be due to decreased ectopic accumulation of substrates in cy-
toplasm, namely glucose and lipids, and to decreased in-
ﬂammation and insulin resistance.

As PPARg is a diet-regulated transcription factor, the
involvement of dietary lipids in adipocyte homeostasis
appears to be obvious. In fact, saturated FFAs can activate
NF-kB through TLR4 signalling, whereas PUFAs bind to
and activate PPARg [30,31]. Despite PUFAs such as o-3
and o-6 activating PPARg, they were described to have
distinct effects on cancer development and growth. o-3
PUFAs inhibit cancer growth and cell motility, increasing
PPARg activation in cell lines and enhancing cancer cell
apoptosis in mice [11]. On the other hand, o-6 PUFAs
were positively correlated with tumour development in
breast and were shown to promote tumour cell motility
[11]. Thus, diet regulation of PPARg is important for
tumour development, but the underlying mechanisms
remain unknown.

AMP-activated kinase. AMPK, a major energy regulator
activated by adiponectin, increases glycolysis and fatty
acid oxidation and inhibits gluconeogenesis and fatty acid
and cholesterol synthesis [29,32]. However, obese and
type 2 diabetic individuals usually have decreased
adiponectin levels, AMPK activity and fatty acid oxidation.
AMPK inhibits SREBP1c and activates PPARa. This results
in increased expression of several enzymes involved in
fatty acid oxidation and decreased expression of ACC
and FAS, key enzymes of
fatty acid synthesis [33].
Furthermore, AMPK directly inactivates ACC, thereby
decreasing malonyl-CoA formation (inhibitor of CPT-
1-mediated mitochondrial
from
acetyl-CoA, resulting in higher rates of mitochondrial

acid uptake)

fatty

fatty acid uptake and oxidation [9,29,32,34]. AMPK
activates PI3K and Akt and induces GLUT-4 transloca-
tion to the cell membrane, thereby increasing glucose
uptake [29,32,35]. Moreover, Abbot and colleagues recently
showed that AMPK is necessary for Akt-mediated fatty acid
uptake in the muscle [35].

Several authors suggested AMPK-induced inhibition of
lipid synthesis as a good strategy to decrease lipid
availability for cell membranes during tumour growth [34].
AMPK also activates p53,
inhibiting the cell cycle [34].
Furthermore, AMPK inhibits aromatase expression in
adipose tissue, contributing to decreased oestrogen
levels and preventing the development of oestrogen-
dependent tumours [34]. Thus, AMPK activation has been
proposed as an effective strategy for cancer therapy, and
positive results have been observed after metformin
treatment, a known activator of AMPK [34].

Hypoxia
A reliable feature of hypertrophic adipose tissue is hypoxia
(resulting from decreased blood supply), which is also
conducive to the activation of inﬂammatory pathways,
macrophage recruitment and dysregulation of adipocyto-
kine secretion [9,36,37]. However, hypoxia is also
common in tumours. HIF-1 is the key factor in cell
response to hypoxia,
stimulating inﬂammation and
angiogenesis
(discussed in the following sections)
[38,39]. These mechanisms are likely to support tumour
growth [9]. Furthermore, HIF-1 exerts signiﬁcant effects
on cellular metabolism. Cancer cells have a signiﬁcant
shift away from oxidative phosphorylation in mitochon-
dria towards glycolysis, a state involved in the ‘Warburg
effect’ [40–42]. Warburg ﬁrstly described that cancer cells
have increased glucose uptake and ATP formation (see
comprehensive revisions about this issue in [92–94]).
As tumour is mostly hypoxic, HIF-1 increases the transcrip-
tion of the cell-surface glucose transporter GLUT-1 and
contributes to the expression of several glycolytic enzymes,
including lactate dehydrogenase, and inhibits acetyl-CoA
formation, which would be used in the oxidative phosphor-
ylation [40,42]. In addition, because of the high rate of
glucose consumption, malignant cells accumulate high
amounts of pyruvate, which can be used to fuel the
tricarboxylic acid cycle for biosynthetic processes, and even
earlier by-products of glycolysis will enter the pentose
phosphate pathway for the maintenance of DNA, RNA
and fatty acids. Recently, our colleagues showed that
methylglyoxal, a metabolite of glycolysis, increases HIF-1
degradation in hypoxic conditions [43]. However, cancer
cells develop resistance mechanisms
such as elevated
expression of glyoxalases, which degrade methylglyoxal [44].
Glyoxalase expression is inhibited in most cells in
hyperglycaemic conditions, possibly accounting for the
different ability of normal and tumoral cells to adapt to
hypoxic conditions [44,45]. The contribution of adipose
tissue hypoxia to tumour development is unknown, but
tumours are usually surrounded by adipose tissue; thus,
it is likely that such an environment may contribute to
a better tumour adaptation [46].

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

Adipose Tissue Dysfunction and Cancer

Cytokines and adipocytokines –
metabolism, inﬂammation and
angiogenesis

Activation of inﬂammatory pathways as a consequence of
accumulation of intracellular metabolites and formation
of hypoxic regions leads to altered cytokine and adipocy-
tokine secretion. This conduces to inhibition of continued
lipids and glucose uptake and stimulates angiogenesis.
However, most of the products released by the adipose
tissue under such conditions may also affect tumour
physiology [30,47–49]. In this section, we review the
alterations of these factors as a result of adipose tissue
dysfunction and how they inﬂuence tumour formation
and development.

Adiponectin
Adiponectin circulates in three distinct molecular forms,
trimeric, hexameric and high-molecular-weight
forms
(several hexameric forms), and it is mainly produced by
the adipose tissue [50–52]. Adiponectin levels, especially
high-molecular-weight forms, were found to be lower in
obesity,
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes and
inversely correlated with abdominal perimeter and fat
mass, more than BMI [1,14,15,53]. Adiponectin expression
is decreased by TNF-a and IL-6 (NF-kB activators) and
increased by PPARg
(Figure 2). However,
adiponectin also inhibits TNF-a and IL-6 expression in macro-
phages,
inactivating the inﬂammatory cascade [14,20].
Adiponectin increases fatty acid oxidation and insulin
sensitivity
it
activates AMPK and PPARa [1,20].

gluconeogenesis,

and decreases

agonists

as

Adiponectin decreases proliferation of several cell types
including adipocytes, endothelial cells and cancer cells [20].
Beyond inhibition of tumour cell growth and survival,
adiponectin inhibits angiogenesis through decreased
VEGF and Bcl-2 expression (anti-apoptotic) and increased
p53, Bax and caspase activation (pro-apoptotic), leading
to endothelial cell apoptosis [1,20]. Likewise, adiponectin
was shown to reduce TNF-a-induced effects on cell
proliferation and migration [53]. In fact, several studies
showed hypoadiponectinaemia as a determinant for larger
tumours with increased angiogenesis [1,14,20]. Thus,
adiponectin may
only
inﬂammation but also angiogenesis, and these effects
may be crucial for regulation of neovascularization in
pathological conditions such as obesity, type 2 diabetes
and also cancer. However, it is not known yet whether
hypoadiponectinaemia is a risk factor for cancer or
hypoadiponectinemia and cancer development are
parallel events of metabolic dysregulation.

decreasing

not

act

in

Leptin
Leptin is currently at the centre of the obesity–cancer link,
as it is produced in proportion to fat mass (almost
exclusively in adipocytes) and potently induces cell
(normal
and
motility [14,20,48,54–57]. Leptin activates JAK/STAT
and MAPK pathways and also the SOCS-1 and SOCS-3,

tumoral) mitogenesis,

growth

and

289

inhibiting insulin and its own signalling cascade
[1,15,56,57]. This mechanism is chronically activated in
obesity and is one of the major causes of leptin and insulin
resistance [1,14,58].

independently of BMI

Clinical studies in Norwegian and Japanese populations
showed leptin correlation with increased risk of breast
and colon cancers,
[45,59].
Furthermore, leptin was also positively correlated with
increased metastization [1,20,51,60]. In most of the patients,
tumour cells express the Ob-Rb. Insulin, IGF-1 and oestradiol
were observed to activate its expression [61]. In addition,
leptin also promotes aromatase expression in adipose
tissue and ER on tumour cells [14,62]. However, leptin
is mitogenic for both ER-positive and ER-negative
tumour cell lines, inhibiting apoptosis and increasing cell
proliferation [14,20,48,53,62].

From this, we may conclude that leptin promotes
tumour cell proliferation both directly and indirectly
(through an increase of oestrogen levels and insulin
resistance). However, leptin effects on cancer development
are still controversial. Several studies reported elevated
leptin levels in cancer patients, but these studies compared
cancer patients with healthy controls without separation of
the obesity component
in the experimental design.
Furthermore, existing studies did not reveal a pattern of
leptin variation between premenopause and postmeno-
pause. Zucker rats, which have a mutation in Ob-Rb and
exhibit hyperleptinaemia, have increased formation of
benign neoplasies but minimal
formation of malign
tumours [53]. In fact, it is possible that leptin does not
act as a tumour inducer but more as a supporter of already
formed tumours.

Resistin
Resistin has been pointed as a major link between innate
immunity and glucose metabolism as it was shown to
inhibit hepatic, muscle and adipose insulin signalling,
consequently leading to inﬂammation and insulin
resistance. Its circulating levels are usually increased in
models of obesity. Antibody neutralization, overexpres-
sion of nonfunctional resistin or gene knockout in mice
results in improved glucose metabolism and insulin
sensitivity [15,18,63–65]. However, extrapolating possible
effects of human resistin from murine experiments has
several caveats. Murine resistin is produced in adipocytes,
whereas human resistin is mainly produced in macrophages
(Figure 2) [15,18,65]. Furthermore, human and murine
resistin genes are located in different chromosomes, and
studies searching for a human gene more similar to murine
resistin have been unsuccessful [15].

Recently, Qatanani and colleagues developed mice with
suppressed expression of endogenous resistin and transgenic
expression of human resistin in macrophages [18].
After consuming a high-calorie diet, these rats had
increased lipolysis in adipose tissue. They also developed
increased triglyceride and diacylglycerol levels and insulin
resistance in muscle, due to PKC-induced serine phosphor-
ylation of insulin receptor and IRS-1 (Figure 2) [18].
Resistin promotes foam cell formation from macrophages

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

290

P. Matafome et al.

through increased lipid uptake, resulting from activation
of scavenger receptors (SR-1 and CD36) involved in
recruiting lipoproteins and FATP. Conversely, resistin
increases proteasomal degradation of ABCA1 involved
in cholesterol efﬂux [15,66].

Human resistin stimulates proliferation of vessel muscle
cells and VECs [15,65,67]. In endothelial and choriocarci-
noma cells, resistin also increases the expression of VEGF
and its receptors while also elevating MMP, possibly
through NF-kB activation [65,68]. Thus,
resistin
overexpression is a physiological response to adipose
tissue hypertrophy and hypoxia, but it may also contribute
to tumour angiogenesis. Despite the data about this issue
still being scarce, several studies have implicated resistin
in the aetiology of obesity-related cancers, namely breast
and colon [50,51,64,69–72]. Resistin may provide unique
insights to the link between obesity, inﬂammation, insulin
resistance and cancer risk in humans.

Visfatin
Visfatin is highly expressed in visceral fat of rodents and
humans, whose plasma circulating levels are positively
correlated with the size of visceral fat deposits [73].
Several studies reported increased visfatin levels in
various pathological conditions, such as obesity, inﬂamma-
tion, diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome and cardiovas-
cular diseases [74–78].

phosphoribosyltransferase,

Visfatin was originally isolated from lymphocytes as
an enzyme
nicotinamide
that
synthesizes nicotinamide mononucleotide from
nicotinamide [79]. The following studies reported an
insulin-mimetic effect through binding to a different
region of
insulin receptor, activating IRS-1 tyrosine
phosphorylation [73,80–86]. However, the original study
reporting these effects was later retracted [73], and the
mechanisms of visfatin action, beyond NAD+ synthesis,
remain obscure. Nevertheless, visfatin expression was found
to be stimulated by HIF-1 and the JNK/NF-kB pathway,
promoting angiogenesis
through MMP expression in
endothelial cells and VEGF expression in tumour cells
[79,87–89]. Visfatin is also expressed in tumoral cells, and
its circulating levels were found to be increased in breast
and colon cancer patients [82,87]. Furthermore, visfatin
was observed to increase cell proliferation and invasion
during breast cancer progression [87]. Visfatin inhibitors
have been clinically evaluated as anticancer agents, but
new epidemiological and cellular studies are needed to
understand the mechanisms of visfatin action on cancer [90].

Tumour necrosis factor alpha
TNF-a was the ﬁrst recognized adipose-derived cytokine
to be involved in metabolism regulation. In this ﬁeld,
Hotamisligil’s laboratory has been particularly active,
producing data and reviews about TNF-a’s role on
adipocyte metabolism (see reviews in [31,47]). TNF-a is
produced mainly in macrophages, but also in adipocytes
and preadipocytes, after excessive lipid accumulation,
activating several serine kinases (JNK and IKK). This
results in NF-kB activation and inhibition of
insulin

signalling (Figure 2) [1,14,15,20]. NF-kB stimulates the
production of other cytokines and inhibits PPARg activity
and subsequent expression of adiponectin, CD36 and
LPL. Thus, TNF-a inhibits preadipocyte differentiation,
lipid and glucose uptake and fatty acid esteriﬁcation and
increases lipolysis [1,53]. These mechanisms aim to
inhibit continued adipocyte growth but may also be
important for cancer progression because they lead to
metabolism dysregulation (as focused on in Section 2.1)
and hyperinsulinaemia, when chronically active. In fact,
a link between TNF-a levels and breast and colon cancer
has been suggested [14]. Beyond its metabolic effects,
TNF-a seems to contribute to tissue alterations necessary
for tumour growth and metastasis, namely cell proliferation.
TNF-a stimulates aromatase expression in adipose tissue,
increasing oestrogen-mediated tumour cell proliferation
[20,91–93]. Furthermore, TNF-a stimulates VEC prolifera-
tion and migration in rat cornea [53]. Clinical trials with
several TNF-a antagonists and antibodies have shown
promising effects in reducing tumour development and
metastasis [94].

Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1
MCP-1 is a protein that recruits and activates circulating
monocytes to the adipose tissue [95–98]. Initially, MCP-1
was considered an activator of antitumour cytotoxic
functions of macrophages. However, identiﬁcation of two
types of TAMs and the revelation of MCP-1 angiogenic
potential altered the perspective of MCP-1 physiology on
cancer (Figure 2) [95,99,100]. In the last years, several
studies have found elevated MCP-1 levels, especially in
advanced stages [96,99]. However, it is not established
whether MCP-1 circulating levels are a systemic marker
of poor prognosis or not. Some discrepancies may be
caused by different studied populations, experimental
designs, degree of metastasis, tumour phase and time of
sample collection [99].

In adipose tissue, MCP-1 expression correlates with
increased macrophage inﬁltration and angiogenesis
[19,28,36]. In epithelial cells, MCP-1 expression is low,
but it is acquired along with the transformation [98,99].
MCP-1 is also secreted by tumour stroma cells, such as
macrophages and ﬁbroblasts, acting through paracrine
and autocrine pathways [95,99]. Recently, Niu and
colleagues showed that MCP-1 promoted in vitro tube
formation in HUVEC. In addition, Hong and colleagues
showed that these effects were dependent on VEGF
activation [101,102]. Furthermore, MCP-1 was observed
to increase angiopoietin (Ang)-2 levels and MMP
expression on monocytes, T cells and tumour cells, which
also contributes to angiogenesis [96,99,103]. On tumour
cells, MCP-1 does not induce proliferation but increases
their migration ability. MCP-1 was also suggested to be
involved in epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transformation,
an event essential for cell transformation [99]. Higher
levels of MCP-1 are correlated with increased macrophage
inﬁltration, MSC migration, vascularization,
tumour
progression and lymphatic invasion [95,96,99,104]. An
anti-MCP-1 antibody decreased MSC migration to tumour,

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

Adipose Tissue Dysfunction and Cancer

291

angiogenesis and lung metastasis, increasing the survival
ratio [99,104]. Thus, as
in adipose tissue, MCP-1
and recruited macrophages change the tumour microenvi-
ronment to support cell proliferation and migration and
angiogenesis.

Angiogenic mechanisms – growth
factors and matrix remodelling

Adipose tissue profoundly depends on angiogenesis as it is
subjected to constant expansion/regression. Capillary
growth is a complex process involving matrix degradation,
endothelial cell migration and tube formation and depends
on the anastomosis of two growing tubes. This process is
regulated by several factors, namely ﬁbroblast growth
factors, hepatic growth factor (HGF), VEGF, Angs (Ang-1
and Ang-2), epithelial growth factors, adipocytokines,
insulin/IGF-1, oestrogens and MMP, some of them already
discussed in this review [53].

Several adipose-derived factors have paracrine effects,
acting directly on neighbouring endothelial cells to
promote angiogenesis. Most of these factors are produced
in response to adipocyte hypertrophy and consequent
metabolic dysregulation and regional hypoxia. As we
already discussed, the unifying point is inﬂammation,
which results from both of these conditions. Inﬂammatory
mediators directly induce angiogenesis and increase the
expression of several angiogenic factors. Furthermore,
most of these factors also recruit macrophages, which also
produce their own set of angiogenic factors (VEGF, TNF-a,
ﬁbroblast growth factors, MMPS and resistin), further
contributing to angiogenesis (Figure 2) [53,105,106].

Tumour angiogenesis is important for its growth, but
vessels are usually dysfunctional with abnormal ramiﬁca-
tions, probably due to the imbalanced expression of growth
factors in hypertrophic adipose tissue and in the tumour.
Furthermore, these vessels are usually very permeable and
allow the passage of ﬂuids, proteins and tumour cells,
favouring metastization.

Growth factors
VEGF is the only angiogenic factor speciﬁc for VECs.
Obese individuals commonly have increased VEGF levels
[see review at 53]. VEGF is produced by adipose tissue
cells, namely adipocytes, preadipocytes and macro-
phages, stimulating VEC proliferation and migration, ex-
pression of proteolytic enzymes and tube formation and
inhibiting apoptosis (Figure 2) [53]. VEGF expression is
stimulated by regional hypoxia (through HIF-1 stabiliza-
tion), factors from the EGF family and insulin (via PI3K
and Akt), to compensate for insulin-induced nutrient
deposition and tissue expansion [53,107,108]. Recently,
our group described the VEGF/Ang-2 ratio to determine
vascular integrity. The imbalance of this ratio caused
endothelial cell apoptosis and loss of vessel
integrity
[109]. However, increased tumour VEGF levels are also
associated with poor prognosis [53]. Consequently,

several antitumour drugs based on its neutralization
were developed. Antibody neutralization of VEGF recep-
tor 2 also decreased both angiogenesis and preadipocyte
differentiation [53].

Other growth factors such as bFGF and HGF have also
been studied as possible players in tumour growth. bFGF
and HGF are produced in adipocytes and stimulate VEC
proliferation and MMP expression [20,53,110]. For bFGF,
no correlations with BMI were found in previous studies,
probably because it acts mainly through paracrine
mechanisms [53]. HGF is known to act on its receptor
Met (product of c-met gene) and to promote proliferation,
motility and invasion of hepatic tumour parenchymal cells
[53,110,111]. However, HFG is produced proportionally
to BMI and correlates with bigger tumours and increased
lymphatic invasion [20,53]. Furthermore, HGF promotes
cell invasion independently of VEGF and also increases
its expression [20,53,110,111]. HGF is highly produced
in tumour or peritumoral adipose tissue, decreasing after
tumour excision [20].

Proteolytic matrix degradation – plasminogen system
Besides MMPs, the plasminogen system also regulates
extracellular matrix degradation, to allow vessel growth.
This system is formed by the plasminogen, cleavage
enzymes (tissue plasminogen activator and uPA and
serine proteases), PAI-1 and membrane uPA receptor
(uPAR), regulating ﬁbrinolysis and matrix proteolysis
[see review at 11]. Plasminogen is cleaved to plasmin by
its tissue plasminogen activator in arterial walls and
by uPA in the extracellular matrix,
increasing matrix
degradation [11]. Furthermore, uPA binding to uPAR
leads to integrin binding and cytoskeleton arrangement
favouring cell migration [11]. Thus, uPA and uPAR are
markers of invasiveness and poor prognosis. uPA inhibition
results in decreased tumour invasiveness. On the other hand,
PAI-1 binds to and inhibits uPA. This complex binds to uPAR
and is internalized [11]. Despite uPA inhibition effects, circu-
lating PAI-1 levels are a marker of poor prognosis in breast
cancer, and it was suggested as a potential target in cancer
therapy [11]. Although the reasons for elevated PAI-1 levels
are not known, it is known to be highly produced in dysfunc-
tional adipose tissue, and it has been suggested to promote
cell growth and migration, angiogenesis and migration of
smooth muscle cells [11,112].

Insulin – mitogenesis and IGF-1
regulation

Insulin resistance is common in patients with elevated
BMI and is a hallmark of type 2 diabetes, being usually
associated with visceral obesity and inﬂammation in
adipose tissue [7,14,15]. Also, the effects of insulin analogues
in type 1 diabetic patients have been discussed in the last
years. Long-action insulin analogues, such as glargine, are
widely used because they do not cause hypoglycaemia.
However, attempting to efﬁciently control postprandial
glycaemia with these medications, authors have found that

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

292

P. Matafome et al.

patients are episodically hyperinsulinaemic [113]. Hyperin-
sulinaemia has been pointed as a major risk factor for breast,
colon and prostate cancer [7,14,15,114–116]. Also, elevated
C-peptide levels were found to be associated with a threefold
increase in colon cancer risk [1,12].

that

Insulin has been shown to increase cell survival and
growth (through the IRS-1–PI3K–Akt pathway), supporting
[113]. Furthermore, Chen and
tumour development
colleagues
recently
reported
insulin-mediated
activation of this pathway causes chemotherapy resistance,
originating new questions about the role of insulin on
cancer [117,118]. However, the impact of insulin mitogenic
effects on obesity-related cancer through this pathway is
controversial, as IRS-1 is partially inhibited on insulin
resistance. Thus,
the discovery of a noncanonical
pathway for insulin-stimulated mitogenesis is a major
hallmark on metabolism-related cancer. Most growth
factors activate the canonical Ras–Raf–MAPK pathway.
Besides increasing IGF-1 and VEGF circulating levels
and aromatase expression in adipose tissue, insulin was
also observed to increase isoprenylated (active) Ras
levels in the cell membrane, thereby increasing cell
response to other growth factors (see review in [113]).
The IGF family components include IGF-1 and 2,
membrane receptors (IGFR1 and 2), IGFBPs (IGFBP1 to
IGFBP6) and IGFBP proteases [14]. Like insulin, IGF-1
regulates cell survival, growth and differentiation and
inhibits apoptosis [9]. On the other hand,
IGFBPs
decrease IGF bioavailability,
inhibiting its effects and
promoting apoptosis [14]. However, IGFBP1 and IGFBP2
expressions are downregulated by insulin,
increasing
free/active IGF-1 levels [3,8]. Insulin-resistant individuals
commonly have higher IGF-1 circulating levels [3,8,9].

On epithelial cells, IGF-1–IGFR binding leads to receptor
dimerization and to PI3K and Ras–Raf–MAPK activation
[14]. Furthermore, oestrogens increase IGF-1 and IGFR1
expressions, acting synergistically in favour of
tumour
growth [14]. As insulin, IGF-1 also activates VEGF expres-
sion and thus indirectly acts on endothelial cells [1].
Elevated IGF-1 and decreased IGFBP-1 levels were
previously correlated with increased cancer risk, tumour
invasion and poor prognosis [1,14]. Also, breast tumours
with elevated IGFR-1 levels, both premenopause and
postmenopause, usually are more invasive [14]. In mice,
IGF-1 overexpression resulted in increased tumour growth,
whereas disruption of IGFR1 prevented it [8,9,14].

The role of macrophages on tissue
remodelling – implications in adipose
tissue and tumour

In obese individuals, adipose tissue commonly has
extensive macrophage inﬁltration, recruited by TNF-a
and particularly by MCP-1 (Figure 2). On the other hand,
macrophage-secreted products such as TNF-a or resistin
induce insulin resistance and promote angiogenesis
(Figure 2). Macrophage coculture results in impaired

adipocytokine expression and increased production of
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines in adipocytes [8].

Tumour environment is formed by several cell types,
namely ﬁbroblasts, cells from hematopoietic lineage,
endothelial cells and adipocytes. These cells strongly
interact, creating a microenvironment that is conducive
to tumour growth [119,120]. Adipose-related tumours
have large amounts of macrophages (up to 50% of the
tumour cells) [100,105,119,120]. More than 80% of
cancers have elevated macrophage inﬁltration, correlating
with increased vessel density, tumour progression and poor
prognosis [53,99,100,104,105,119]. Genetic macrophage
elimination reduces tumour progression and metastasis in
mice [8].

A tumour commonly has two distinct populations of
macrophages: M1 macrophages are pro-inﬂammatory
and secrete antitumour cytokines and M2 macrophages
are immunosuppressive and produce a broad range of
angiogenic and growth factors, including MCP-1, MMPs,
TGF-b, VEGF and PDGF, promoting proliferation and
migration of tumour cells and VEC, matrix degradation
and ultimately angiogenesis
[8,49,104–106,119–121].
The reason why this macrophage population acquires this
behaviour is still unknown. However, this is also observed
in macrophages recruited to the hypertrophic adipose
tissue, which are involved in tissue remodelling and
angiogenesis [36].

Macrophages

intensely populate the ﬁbrotic ring
surrounding the tumour and regions of basal membrane
rupture. They seem to regulate collagen synthesis in
ﬁbroblasts and also support blood vessel formation close
to collagen ﬁbres [119]. This leads to increased collagen
deposition, anchored to blood vessels, allowing faster
tumour cell migration to the circulation (Figure 1)
[100,119]. These features are not found in macrophage-
deﬁcient mice [8,119]. Importantly, adipose tissue from
obese animal models was recently described to develop
extensive ﬁbrotic regions, which may support growth of
adipose-associated tumours
from
tumour periphery also have high aromatase expression,
which is increased by macrophage-released cytokines
such as TNF-a [14,20].

[121]. Fibroblasts

The close relation between tumour cells and macrophages
in the invasive front involves CSF-1 and EGF signalling
[100,120]. Tumour
cells express CSF-1 to increase
macrophage activity, and macrophages express EGF to
stimulate migration of tumour cells. Accordingly, macro-
phages express CSF-1R whereas tumour cells express
EGFR1 [119]. Mice with CSF-1 depletion have decreased
VEGF and MMP expression and metastization and more
benign phenotypes. CSF-1 expression restores phenotype,
and CSF-1 overexpression in normal mice leads to more
TAM and increased tumour growth and metastization
[100,119]. Moreover, macrophage depletion results in 40%
decreased angiogenesis
even in advanced tumours,
suggesting that macrophages are involved in the formation
of new blood vessels and in the remodelling of those already
existing, as observed during adipose tissue expansion
[36,100,119]. Macrophage-derived VEGF, beyond VEC

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

Adipose Tissue Dysfunction and Cancer

293

stimulation, also recruits other macrophages to support
tumour growth [100,119]. Present data show that TAM
and adipose tissue macrophages share important similari-
ties, promoting tissue remodelling and angiogenesis. In
addition, adipose tissue macrophages may possibly support
tumour development.

Conclusions

adipose

hypertrophy. Hypertrophic

Adipose tissue dysfunction in obesity occurs as a result of
tissue
tissue
commonly presents a dysregulated lipid metabolism and
formation of hypoxic regions. These two events lead to
the activation of inﬂammatory pathways and, consequently,
increased pro-
to impaired adipocytokine expression,
inﬂammatory cytokine expression, angiogenesis,
insulin
resistance
recruitment. All
these
features are also observed in tumours, which usually
are very close to dysfunctional adipose tissue, namely
in breast and colon cancers. Despite the mechanisms
discussed here being shown to be tumour supportive,

and macrophage

the trigger for tumour development is still unknown
and should be a matter of interest for future studies.

Search strategy and selection criteria

‘estrogens’,

Bibliographic search was performed using electronic
databases, namely PubMed, with the reference words
‘obesity’, ‘adipose tissue’, ‘adipocytokines’, ‘angiogenesis’,
‘insulin’,
‘macrophages’, which were also
paired with ‘cancer’. Original (both biochemical and
epidemiological) and review papers with higher relevance
and novelty from the last 3 years were considered.
Furthermore, older articles with recognized importance
in the ﬁeld were also included.

Conﬂict of interest

The authors have declared that there is no conﬂict of
interest.

References

obesity to insulin resistance and type
2 diabetes. Mol Cell Biol 2008; 9(5):
367–377.

1. Pais R, Silaghi H, Silaghi AC, Rusu ML,
Dumitrascu DL. Metabolic syndrome and
risk of subsequent colorectal cancer.
World J Gastroenterol 2009; 15(41):
5141–5148.

atherogenic

2. Liu C, Hsu H, Li C, et al. Central obesity
and
in
metabolic syndrome are associated
with increased risk for
colorectal
adenoma in a Chinese population.
BMC Gastroenter 2010; 27: 10–51.

dyslipidemia

3. Smith U, Gale EA. Cancer and diabetes:
are we ready for prime time? Diabetologia
2010; 53: 1541–1544.

4. Fenton JI, Birmingham JM. Adipokine
regulation of colon cancer: adiponectin
attenuates interleukin-6-induced colon
carcinoma cell proliferation via STAT-
3. Mol Carcinog 2010; 49: 700–709.

5. Renehan A, Tyson M, Egger M, Heller
R, Zwahlen M. Body-mass index and
incidence of
cancer: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of prospective
observational studies. Lancet 2008; 371:
569–578.

6. Yoon JH, Lee HL, Kim DW, Choi CR. Is
obesity a risk factor for advanced colon
polyps in males? Hepatogastroenterology
2011; 58(109): 1159–1162.

for

7. Kang H, Kim D, Kim H, et al. Visceral
obesity and insulin resistance as risk
factors
colorectal adenoma: a
cross-sectional, case–control study. Am
J Gastroenterol 2010; 105(1): 178–187.
8. Donohoe CL, Pidgeon GP, Lysaght
J, Reynolds JV. Obesity and gastroin-
testinal cancer. Br J Surg 2010; 97:
628–642.

9. van Kruijsdijk R, van der Wall E, Visseren
F. Obesity and cancer:
the role of
dysfunctional adipose tissue. Cancer Epi-
demiol Biomarkers Prev 2009; 18(10):
2569–2578.

10. Oh T, Byeon J, Myung S, et al. Visceral
obesity as a risk factor for colorectal
neoplasm. Gastroenterology 2008; 23(3):
411–417.

the

11. Carter J, Church F. Obesity and breast
peroxisome
cancer:
roles
proliferator-activated
and
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1. PPAR
Res 2009; 2009: 345320.

of
receptor-g

12. Bobe G, Murphy G, Rogers CJ, et al.
Serum adiponectin, leptin, C-peptide,
homocysteine, and colorectal adenoma
recurrence in the polyp prevention
trial. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
2010; 19(6): 1441–1452.

13. Adams T, Gress R, Smith S, et al. Long-
term mortality after gastric bypass
surgery. N Engl J Med 2007; 357:
753–761.

14. Lorincz AM, Sukumar S. Molecular
links between obesity and breast
cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer 2006; 13:
279–292.

15. Lazar M. Resistin- and obesity-associ-
ated metabolic diseases. Horm Metab
Res 2007; 39: 710–716.

16. McLaughlin T, Deng A, Yee G, et al.
Inﬂammation in subcutaneous adipose
tissue: relationship to adipose cell size.
Diabetologia 2010; 53: 369–377.

17. Yamaji T, Iwasaki M, Sasazuki S, Tsugane
S. Interaction between adiponectin and
leptin inﬂuences the risk of colorectal
adenoma. Cancer Res 2010; 70(13):
5430–5437.

18. Qatanani M, Szwergold NR, Greaves
DR, Ahima RS, Lazar MA. Macrophage-
derived human resistin exacerbates
adipose tissue inﬂammation and insulin
resistance in mice. J Clin Invest 2009;
119: 531–539.

19. Guilherme A, Virbasis JV, Puri V, Czech
linking

MP. Adipocyte dysfunctions

20. Vona-Davis L, Rose DP. Adipokines as
endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine
factors
risk and
progression.
Cancer
2007; 14: 189–206.

Endocr Relat

in breast

cancer

21. Carter J, Church F. Mature breast
adipocytes promote breast cancer cell
motility. Exp Mol Pathol 2012; 92:
312–317.

lesions

development

22. Hirose Y, Hata K, Kuno T, et al.
Enhancement
of
azoxymethane-induced colonic prema-
lignant
in C57BL/KsJ-db/db
mice. Carcinogenesis 2004; 25(5):
821–825.
23. Shimizu M, Shirakami Y, Sakai H, et al.
( )-Epigallocatechin gallate suppresses
azoxymethane-induced colonic prema-
lignant lesions in male C57BL/KsJ-db/
db mice. Cancer Prev Res 2008; 1: 298–
304.

of

24. Miyamoto S, Yasui Y, Ohigashi H,
Tanaka T, Murakami A. Dietary
ﬂavonoids suppress azoxymethane-
induced colonic preneoplastic lesions
in male C57BL/KsJ-db/db mice. Chem
Biol Interact 2010; 183: 276–283.

25. Aparicio T, Guilmeau S, Goiot H, et al.
Leptin reduces the development of the
initial precancerous lesions induced by
azoxymethane
colonic
mucosa. Gastroenterology 2004; 126:
499–510.

in the

rat

26. Rutkowski J, Davis K, Scherer P.
Mechanisms of obesity and related
pathologies: the macro and microcircu-
lation of adipose tissue. FEBS 2009;
276: 5738–5746.

27. Ye J, Gao Z, Yin J, He Q. Hypoxia is
insulin

a potential

risk factor

for

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

294

P. Matafome et al.

resistance and adiponectin reduction in
adipose tissue of ob/ob and dietary
obese mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab 2007; 293: E1118–E1128.

a

28. Lumeng C, DeYoung S, Bodzin J, Saltiel
A. Increased inﬂammatory properties of
adipose tissue macrophages recruited
during diet-induced obesity. Diabetes
2007; 56: 16–23.

29. Liu Y, Wan Q, Guan Q, Zhao J. High-fat
feeding impairs both the expression
and activity of AMPKa in rat skeletal
muscle. Biochem Biophys Res Com
2006; 339: 701–707.
30. Ram V. Therapeutic

signiﬁcance of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
modulators in diabetes. Drugs of today
2003; 39: 609–632.

31. Wellen K, Uysal T, Wiesbrock S,
Yang Q, Chen H, Hotamisligil G. Interac-
tumor necrosis factor-a and
tion of
thiazolidinedione-regulated
pathways
in obesity. Endocrinology 2004; 145:
2214–2220.

32. Juge-Aubry C, Henrichot E, Meier C.
of
J Clin Endoc Metab

Adipose
inﬂammation.
2005; 19: 547–566.

regulator

tissue:

33. Shibata R, Sato K, Pimentel D, et al.
Adiponectin protects against myocardial
ischemia–reperfusion
through
AMPK- and COX-2-dependent mechan-
isms. Nat Med 2005; 11: 1096–1103.

injury

34. Brown KA, Simpson ER. Obesity and
breast cancer: progress to understand-
ing the relationship. Cancer Res 2010;
70(1): 4–7.

35. Abbott MJ, Constantinescu S, Turcotte
LP. AMPKa2 is an essential signal in
the regulation of
insulin-stimulated
fatty acid uptake in control-fed and
high fat-fed mice. Exp Physiol 2012;
97(5): 603–517.

36. Pang C, Gao Z, Yin J, Zhang J, Jia W, Ye
J. Macrophage inﬁltration into adipose
tissue may promote angiogenesis for
adipose tissue remodeling in obesity.
Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2008;
295: E313–E322.

37. Olefsky J, Glass C. Macrophages,

in-
ﬂammation and insulin resistance.
Annu Rev Physiol 2010; 72: 219–146.

38. Semenza G. Hydroxylation of HIF-1:
the molecular
(Bethesda) 2004;

oxygen sensing at
level. Physiology
19: 176–182.

39. Van Uden P, Kenneth N, Rocha S.
Regulation of hypoxia inducible factor-
1a by NF-kB. Biochem J 2008; 412(3):
477–484.

40. Koppenol W, Bounds P, Dang C. Otto
Warburg’s
to current
concepts of cancer metabolism. Nat
Rev Cancer 2011; 11: 325–337.

contributions

41. Israël M, Schwartz L. The metabolic
advantage of tumor cells. Mol Cancer
2011; 10: 70.

42. Porponato P, Dhup S, Dadich R, Copetti
T, Sonveaux P. Anticancer targets in the
glycolytic metabolism of
tumors: a
comprehensive review. Front Pharma-
col 2011; 2: 1–18.

al. The

43. Bento C, Fernandes R, Ramalho J,
chaperone-dependent
et
ubiquitin ligase CHIP targets HIF-1a
for degradation in the presence of
methylglyoxal. PLoS One 2010; 5
(11): 1–13.

44. Thornalley P, Rabbani N. Glyoxalases
tumorigenesis and multidrug resistance.
Sem Cell Dev Biol 2011; 22: 318–325.

45. Ramasamy R, Yan SF, Schmidt AM.
Advanced glycation end products: from
precursors to RAGE: round and round
we go. Amino Acids 2012; 42(4):
1151–1161.

46. Kellenberger L, Bruin J, Greenway J,
et al. The role of dysregulated glucose
metabolism in epithelial ovarian cancer.
J Oncol 2010: 514310.

47. Sethi J, Hotamisligil G. The role of
TNFa in adipocyte metabolism. Cell
Dev Biol 1999; 10: 19–29.

48. Rajala M, Scherer P. Minireview:
the adipocyte at
the crossroads of
energy homeostasis, inﬂammation and
atherosclerosis. Endocrin 2003; 144:
3765–3773.

49. Ono M. Molecular

links between
tumor angiogenesis and inﬂammation:
inﬂammatory stimuli of macrophages
and cancer
for
therapeutic strategy. Cancer Sci 2008;
99(8): 1501–1506.

targets

cells

as

of

50. Gonullu G, Kahraman H, Bedir A,
Bektas A, Yücel I. Association between
adiponectin, resistin, insulin resistance,
and colorectal tumors. Int J Colorectal
Dis 2010; 25(2): 205–212.

51. Wei-kai H, Yu-xin X, Ting Y, et al.
Adipocytokines and breast
cancer
risk. Chin Med J 2007; 120(18):
1592–1596.

52. Nakajima TE, Yamada Y, Hamano T,
et al. Adipocytokines as new promising
markers
tumors:
adiponectin for colorectal adenoma
and resistin and visfatin for colorectal
cancer. Cancer Sci 2010; 101(5):
1286–1291.

colorectal

53. Vona-Davis L, Rose DV. Angiogenesis,
adipokines and breast cancer. Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev 2009; 20: 193–201.
54. Golay A, Ybarra J. Link between
obesity and type 2 diabetes. J Clin
Endoc Metab 2005; 19(4): 649–663.

55. Cheng SP, Yin PH, Hsu YC, et al. Leptin
enhances migration of human papil-
lary thyroid cancer cells through the
PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK signaling
pathways. Oncol Rep 2011; 26(5):
1265–1271.

56. Jaffe T, Schwartz B. Leptin promotes
motility and invasiveness in human
colon cancer
activating
multiple signal-transduction pathways.
Int J Cancer 2008; 123: 2543–2556.

cells

by

57. Chen J. Multiple signal pathways in
obesity-associated cancer. Obes Rev
2011; 12: 1063–1070.

58. Ueki K, Kadowaki T, Kahn R. Role of sup-
pressor of cytokine signalling SOCS-1
and SOCS-3 in hepatic steatosis and the
metabolic syndrome. Hepatol Res 2005;
33: 185–192.

59. Stattin P, Lukanova A, Biessy C, et al.
Obesity and colon cancer: does leptin
provide a link? Int J Cancer 2004;
109: 149–152.

60. Housa D, Housova J, Vernerova Z,
Haluzik M. Adipocytokines and cancer.
Physiol Res 2006; 55: 233–244.

61. Garofalo C, Koda M, Cascio S, et al.
Increased expression of leptin and the
leptin receptor as a marker of breast
cancer progression: possible role of

69. Torres-Leal

F,

Fonseca-Alaniz M,
Rogero M, Tirapegui J. The role of
inﬂamed adipose tissue in the insulin
resistance. Cell Biochem Funct 2010;
28: 623–631.

obesity-related stimuli. Clin Cancer Res
2006; 12(5): 1447–1453.

62. Catalano S, Marsico S, Giordano C,
et al. Leptin enhances, via AP-1,
expression of aromatase in the MCF-7
cell line. J Biol Chem 2003; 278(31):
28668–28676.

63. Menzaghi C, Trischitta V. Genetics
of
serum resistin: a paradigm of
population-speciﬁc regulation? Diabe-
tologia 2010; 53(2): 226–228.

64. Sun CA, Wu MH, Chu CH, et al.
resistin and breast
Adipocytokine
cancer risk. Breast Cancer Res Treat
2010; 123(3): 869–876.

65. Robertson SA, Rae CJ, Graham A.
Induction of angiogenesis by murine
resistin: putative role of PI3-kinase
and NO-dependent pathways. Regul
Pept 2009; 152: 41–47.

lipid

66. Lee TS, Lin CY, Tsai JY, et al. Resistin
increases
by
affecting class A scavenger receptor,
CD36
cassette
transporter-A1 in macrophages. Life
Sci 2009; 84: 97–104.

accumulation

ATP-binding

and

67. Zhang J, Lei T, Chen X, et al. Resistin
up-regulates COX-2 expression via
TAK1-IKK-NF-kB signaling pathway.
Inﬂammation 2010; 33(1): 25–33.

68. Di Simone N, Di Nicuolo F, Sanguinetti
M, et al. Resistin regulates human
choriocarcinoma cell invasive behav-
ior and endothelial cell angiogenic
processes. J Endocrinol 2006; 189:
691–699.

70. Danese E, Montagnana M, Minicozzi
AM, et al. The role of resistin in
colorectal
cancer. Clin Chim Acta
2012; 413: 760–776.

71. Lee Y, Chen Y, Wu C, Lo S, Hou M,
Yuan S. Resistin expression in breast
cancer tissue as a marker of prognosis
and hormone therapy stratiﬁcation.
Gynecol Oncol 2012; 125: 742–750.
doi:10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.02.032.

72. Hlavna M, Kohut L, Lipkova J, et al.
resistin levels with
risk. Neoplasma

Relationship of
endometrial cancer
2011; 58(2): 124–128.

73. Fukuhara A, Matsuda M, Nishizawa M,
et al. Visfatin: a protein secreted by
visceral fat that mimics the effects of
insulin. Science 2005; 307: 426–430.

Elisaf M.

74. Filippatos T, Derdemezis C, Kiortsis D,
Tselepis A,
Increased
plasma levels of visfatin/pre-B cell
colony-enhancing factor in obese and
overweight patients with metabolic
syndrome. J Endocrinol
Invest 2007;
30: 323–326.

75. Chang Y, Chang D, Lin K, Shin S, Lee Y.
Visfatin in overweight/obesity, type 2
diabetes,
insulin resistance, metabolic
syndrome and cardiovascular dis-
eases: a meta-analysis and systemic
review. Diab Metab Res Rev 2011;
27: 515–527.

76. Esteghamati A, Alamdari A, Zandieh A,
et al. Serum visfatin is associated with
type 2 diabetes mellitus independent
of insulin resistance and obesity. Diab
Res Clin Pract 2011; 91: 154–158.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

Adipose Tissue Dysfunction and Cancer

295

77. Kang Y, Song H, Lee M, Ko G, Cha D.
Plasma concentration of visfatin is a
new surrogate marker of
systemic
inﬂammation in type 2 diabetes. Diab
Res Clin Pract 2010; 89: 141–149.

78. Shaker O, El-Shehaby A, Zakaria A,
et al. Plasma visfatin and retinol bind-
ing protein-4 levels in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus and their rela-
tionship to adiposity and fatty liver.
Clin Biochem 2011; 44: 1457–1463.

signaling

79. Park J, Kim W, Shin S, et al. Visfatin
exerts angiogenic effects on human
umbilical vein endothelial cells through
the mTOR
pathway.
Biochem Bioph Acta 2011; 1813:
763–771.

80. Kamińska A, Kopczyńska E, Bronisz A,
et al. An evaluation of visfatin levels
in obese subjects. Endokrynol Pol
2010; 61: 169–173.

81. Antuna-Puente B, Feve B, Fellahi S,
Bastard J. Adipokines: the missing link
between insulin resistance and obesity.
Diabetes Metab 2008; 34: 2–11.

82. Wang Z, Nakayama T. Inﬂammation, a
link between obesity and cardiovascular
disease. Mediators Inﬂamm 2010; 2010:
535918.

83. Stofkova A. Resistin and visfatin:
regulators
sensitivity,
inﬂammation and immunity. Endocr
Regul 2010; 44: 25–36.

insulin

84. Koerner A, Kratzasch J, Kiess W.
Adipocytokines:
leptin—the classical,
resistin—the controversial, adiponec-
tin—the promising, and more to come.
Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
2005; 19(4): 525–546.

85. Rabe K, Lehrke M, Parhofer K, Broedl
U. Adipokines and insulin resistance.
Mol Med 2008; 14: 741–751.

86. Xie H, Tang S, Luo X, et al. Insulin-like
effects of visfatin in human osteoblasts.
Calcif Tissue Int 2007; 80(3): 201–210.
87. Kim J, Kim E, Jeong B, et al. Visfatin
stimulates
of MCF-7
human breast cancer cells. Mol Cells
2010; 30: 341–345.

proliferation

88. Wozniak S, Gee L, Wachtel M, Frezza
E. Adipose tissue: the new endocrine
organ? A review article. Dig Dis Sci
2009; 54(9): 1847–1856.

of

91. Sikalidis A, Varamini B. Roles of
hormones and signaling molecules in
describing the relationship between
obesity and colon cancer. Pathol Oncol
Res 2011; 17: 785–790.

92. Tomita Y, Yang X,

Ishida Y, et al.
lung
Spontaneous
of
metastasis in the absence of
tumor
necrosis factor receptor p55. Int J Can-
cer 2004; 112: 927–933.

regression

89. McGee K, Harte A, da Silva N, et al.
Visfatin is regulated by rosiglitazone
in type 2 diabetes and inﬂuenced by
NF-kB and JNK in human abdominal
subcutaneous adipocytes. PLoS One
2011; 6(6): 1–9.

90. Bi T, Che X. Nampt/PBEF/visfatin and
2010;

Cancer

Ther

Biol

cancer.
10: 119–125.

93. Balkwill F. Tumour necrosis

factor
and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2009; 9:
361–371.

94. Wu Y, Zhou B. TNF-alpha/NF-kappaB/
Snail pathway in cancer cell migration
and invasion. Br J Cancer 2010; 102:
639–644.

95. Dwyer RM, Potter-Beirne SM, Harring-
ton KA, et al. Monocyte chemotactic
protein-1 secreted by primary breast
tumors stimulates migration of mesen-
chymal stem cells. Clin Cancer Res
2007; 13(17): 5020–5027.

96. Yoshidome H, Kohno H, Shida T, et al.
Signiﬁcance of monocyte chemoattrac-
tant protein-1 in angiogenesis and
survival in colorectal liver metastases.
Int J Oncol 2009; 34: 923–930.

97. Mojsilovic-Terovic J, Callaghan D, Cui
H, Dean C, Stanimirovic D, Zhang W.
Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is
involved in the regulation of hyp-
oxia-stimulated expression of mono-
cyte
protein-1
(MCP-1/CCL2) and MCP-5 (Ccll2)
in astrocytes. J Neuroinﬂamm 2007;
4: 12.

chemoattractant

98. Zhang J, Lu Y, Pienta KJ. Multiple roles
of chemokine (C–C motif) ligand 2 in
promoting prostate cancer growth.
J Natl Cancer Inst 2010; 102(8):
522–528.

99. Soria G, Ben-Baruch A. The inﬂamma-
tory chemokines CCL2 and CCL5 in
breast cancer. Cancer Lett 2008; 267:
271–285.

cancer:

100. O’Brien J, Schedin P. Macrophages in
breast
involution
macrophages account for the poor prog-
nosis of pregnancy-associated breast
cancer? J Mammary Gland Biol Neopla-
sia 2009; 14: 145–157.

do

101. Hong K, Ryu J, Han K. Monocyte che-
moattractant protein-1-induced angiogen-
esis is mediated by vascular endothelial
growth factor-A. Blood 2005; 105(4):
1405–1407.

102. Niu J, Azfer A, Zhelyabovska O, Fatma S,
Kolattukudy PE. Monocyte chemotactic
protein (MCP)-1 promotes angiogenesis
via a novel transcription factor, MCP-1-
induced protein (MCPIP). J Biol Chem
2008; 283(21): 14542–14551.

103. Eklund L, Olsen BR. Tie receptors and
their angiopoietin ligands are context-
dependent
vascular
remodeling. Exp Cell Res 2006; 312:
630–641.

regulators

104. Fujimoto H, Sangai T, Ishii G, et al.
Stromal MCP-1 in mammary tumors
induces tumor-associated macrophage
inﬁltration and contributes to tumor
progression. Int J Cancer 2009; 125:
1276–1284.

105. Mantovani A, Marchesi F, Porta C, Sica A,
Allavena P. Inﬂammation and cancer:
breast cancer as a prototype. Breast
2007; 16: S27–S33.

106. Mancino A, Lawrence T. Nuclear
factor-kB
associated
macrophages. Clin Cancer Res 2010;
16(3): 784–789.

tumor

and

of

factor

growth

107. Edwards JP, Zhang X, Mosser DM.
by
Macrophages
regulatory epidermal growth factor-
like. J Immunol 2009; 182: 1929–1939.
108. Fang L, Li G, Liu G, Sam W, Lee SW,
Aaronson
of
heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor
counteracts p53 growth suppression
through activation of MAPK and
PI3K/Akt signaling cascades. EMBO
2001; 20(8): 1931–1939.

induction

p53

SA.

109. Bento C, Fernandes R, Matafome P,
Sena C, Seiça R, Pereira P. Methyl-
glyoxal-induced imbalance in the
ratio of vascular endothelial growth
factor to angiopoietin 2 secreted by
retinal
cells
leads to endothelial dysfunction. Exp
Physiol 2010; 95(9): 955–970.

epithelial

pigment

110. Tomita N, Morishita R, Taniyama Y,
et al. Angiogenic property of hepato-
cyte growth factor is dependent on
upregulation of essential
transcription
factor for angiogenesis, ets-1. Circulation
2003; 107: 1411–1417.

111. Matsumoto K, Nakamura T, Sakai K,
Nakamura T. Hepatocyte growth factor
and Met
and
therapeutic
approach with NK4.
Proteomics 2008; 8: 3360–3370.

in tumor biology

112. Lupu-Meiri M, Geras-Raaka E, Lupu R,
et al. Knock-down of plasminogen-acti-
vator inhibitor-1 enhances expression
of E-cadherin and promotes epithelial
differentiation of human pancreatic
adenocarcinoma cells. J Cell Physiol
2012; 227: 3621–3628. doi:10.1002/
jcp.24068.

113. Draznin B. Mitogenic action of insulin:
friend, foe or ‘frenemy’? Diabetologia
2010; 53(2): 229–233.

114. Tsugane S, Inoue M. Insulin resistance
and cancer: epidemiological evidence.
Cancer Sci 2010; 101(5): 1073–1079.

115. Jonhson J, Pollak M. Insulin, glucose
and increased risk of cancer in patients
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia
2010; 53: 2086–2088.

116. Albanes D, Weinstein SJ, Wright ME,
et al. Serum insulin, glucose, indices
of insulin resistance, and risk of pros-
tate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;
101(18): 1272–1279.

117. Chen J, Huang X, Qiao L, Katsiﬁs A. In-
sulin caused drug resistance to oxalipla-
tin in colon cancer cell line HT29. J
Gastrointest Oncol 2011; 2: 27–33.

118. Renehan A, Dive C. Obesity,

insulin
and chemoresistance in colon cancer.
J Gastrointest Oncol 2011; 2(1): 8–10.
119. Pollard JW. Macrophages deﬁne the
invasive microenvironment in breast
cancer. J Leukoc Biol 2008; 84(3):
623–630.

120. Mantovani A, Sica A. Macrophages,
innate immunity and cancer: balance,
tolerance, and diversity. Curr Opin
Immunol 2010; 22: 231–237.

121. Strissel K, Stancheva Z, Miyoshi H,
et al. Adipocyte death, adipose tissue
remodeling and obesity complications.
Diabetes 2007; 56: 2910–2918.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2013; 29: 285–295.
DOI: 10.1002/dmrr

AMPK as a metabolic tumor 
suppressor: control of metabolism 
and cell growth

Zhijun Luo†, Mengwei Zang & Wen Guo
†Author for correspondence: Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany 
Street, Evans 645, Boston, MA 02118, USA n Tel.: +1 617 414 1033 n Fax: +1 617 414 1646 n zluo@bu.edu

AMPK  is  an  evolutionarily  conserved  fuel-sensing  enzyme  that  is  activated  in 
shortage of energy and suppressed in its surfeit. AMPK activation stimulates fatty 
acid  oxidation,  enhances  insulin  sensitivity,  alleviates  hyperglycemia  and 
hyperlipidemia,  and  inhibits  proinflammatory  changes.  Thus,  AMPK  is  a  well-
received therapeutic target for metabolic syndrome and Type 2 diabetes. Recent 
studies indicate that AMPK plays a role in linking metabolic syndrome and cancer. 
AMPK  is  an  essential  mediator  of  the  tumor  suppressor  LKB1  and  could  be 
suppressed  in  cancer  cells  containing  loss-of-function  mutations  of  LKB1  or 
containing active mutations of B-Raf, or in cancers associated with metabolic 
syndrome. The activation of AMPK reprograms cellular metabolism and enforces 
metabolic checkpoints by acting on mTORC1, p53, fatty acid synthase and other 
molecules  for  regulating  cell  growth  and  metabolism.  In  keeping  with  in  vitro 
studies, recent epidemiological studies indicate that the incidence of cancer is 
reduced  in  Type  2  diabetes  treated  with  metformin,  an  AMPK  activator.  Thus, 
AMPK is emerging as an interesting metabolic tumor suppressor and a promising 
target for cancer prevention and therapy.

AMP-activated  protein  kinase  acts  as  a  fuel 
gauge that is activated under stresses such as 
hypoxia,  ischemia,  glucose  deprivation  and 
exercise  [1].  Activation  of  AMPK  stimulates 
fatty acid oxidation to generate more ATP to 
cope with acute energy demand and inhibits 
anabolic processes that consume ATP [1]. As a 
result, energy is preserved for acute cellular pro-
grams. In addition, AMPK activation enhances 
insulin sensitivity, inhibits hepatic glucose pro-
duction, stimulates glucose uptake in muscle, 
inhibits fatty acid synthesis and esterification, 
and diminishes proinflammatory changes  [2]. 
Thus, AMPK is a well-accepted target for the 
treatment of metabolic syndrome and Type 2 
diabetes (for extensive reviews, refer to  [1–3]). 
During the last 5 years, since our first review [3], 
great attention has been drawn to link AMPK 
and cancer, and substantial progress has been 
made. AMPK, by regulating a variety of down-
stream targets, such as mTORC1, p53 and fatty 
acid synthase (FASN), and associated metabolic 
processes, controls intra cellular energy levels 
in order to maintain the cell growth rate at an 
appropriate level. Likewise, AMPK activation 
under  metabolic  stress  or  by  pharmacologi-
cal activators can regulate various processes, 
including cell cycle checkpoint, cell polarity, 
senescence, autophagy and apoptosis  [4–7]. In 
this article, we aim to summarize recent evi-
dence  in  support  of  the  notion  that  AMPK 

serves  as  a  metabolic  tumor  suppressor  and 
discuss the implications of AMPK in cancer 
prevention and treatment. 

Activation of AMPK
AMP-activated protein kinase belongs to a family 
of serine/threonine protein kinases and is highly 
conserved from yeast to human. It consists of 
three subunits: a catalytic subunit (a) and two 
regulatory  subunits  (b  and  g)  [8,9].  In  mam-
mals, each subunit of AMPK contains two to 
three isoforms (a1, a2; b1, b2; g1, g2 and g3). 
When cells confront metabolic stress, the intra-
cellular AMP level or the ratio of AMP to ATP 
is increased. AMP then binds to the g-subunit, 
yielding two outcomes; first, it serves as allo-
steric activator and second, it protects AMPK 
against phosphatases to dephosphorylate threo-
nine 172 in the activation loop of the catalytic 
a-subunit [9–11]. Another critical step for AMPK 
activation is the phosphorylation of threonine 
172. Previous studies suggest that AMP binding 
enables the phosphorylation of threonine 172 by 
an upstream kinase [12,13]. However, this notion 
is challenged by recent in vitro studies showing 
that phosphorylation of AMPK by purified LKB1 
complex is independent of AMP [11,14]. A possible 
explanation of this discrepancy is that the AMPK 
preparations used in previous studies may have 
been contaminated with phosphatases, of which 
the activity toward AMPK is inhibited by AMP.

r

F
u
t
u
e
O
n
c
o
o
g
y

 

l

R
e
v
e
w

i

Keywords

n acetyl CoA carboxylase 
n AMPK n fatty acid synthase 
n LKB1 n metabolic syndrome 
n metabolism n mTOR n p53 
n tumor suppressor 
n tumorigenesis

10.2217/FON.09.174  © 2010 Future Medicine Ltd 

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3), 457–470

ISSN 1479-6694

457

part ofFor reprint orders, please contact: reprints@futuremedicine.comReview Luo, Zang & Guo

AMP-activated  protein  kinase  can  also  be 
activated by hormones and cytokines, including 
leptin (e.g., in skeletal muscle) and adiponec-
tin secreted from adipocytes, IL-6 and ciliary 
neurotrophic factor (CNTF) [1,15]. Interestingly, 
leptin could exert opposite effects on AMPK 
depending on cell types. While it inhibits the 
enzyme  in  the  arcuate  and  paraventricular 
regions  of  the  hypothalamus  of  fasted  mice, 
leptin activates a2 isotype of AMPK in skeletal 
muscle [16,17]. In addition, AMPK can be acti-
vated by a variety of pharmacological agents. 
The prototypical activator is 5-aminoimidazole-
4-carboxamide 1-d-ribonucleoside (AICAR), 
a cell permeable agent that is phosphorylated 
and converted to ZMP, an AMP analog, after 
entering  the  cell.  Importantly,  two  clinically 
used antidiabetic drugs, metformin and thia-
zolidinediones (TZDs), have been known to 
activate AMPK  [15]. Upon activation, AMPK 
phosphorylates  a  plethora  of  substrates  and 
regulates their functions (Figure 1), which are far 
beyond the canonical ones that are known to 
promote fatty acid oxidation and simultaneously 
inhibit lipid synthesis [8,9]. 

Thus  far,  several  kinases  have  been  identi-
fied  to  phosphorylate  threonine  172  on  the 
catalytic  a-subunit  of  AMPK  leading  to  its 
activation. The first kinase is LKB1, which is 
originally  found  in  liver  and  also  known  as 
serine/threonine  kinase  11  (STK11)  [13,18,19]. 
LKB1 is ubiquitously expressed and responsible 
for  AMPK  activation  in  most  scenarios.  The 
second kinase is calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase-b  (CaMKK-b),  which  phosphorylates 
AMPK in response to increases in intracellular 
Ca2+ levels instead of AMP [20,21]. Other kinases 
include TGF-b-activating kinase 1 (TAK1) and 
ataxia-telangiectasia  mutated  (ATM)  [22–24]. 
Whether these kinases are bona fide kinases for 
AMPK  remains  to  be  further  determined  by 
genetic approach. Interestingly, a recent study 
has reported that TAK1 mediates TNF-related 
apoptosis-inducing ligand to activate AMPK, 
inducing autophagy independent of LKB1 and 
CaMMK [25].

AMPK mediates the tumor suppressive 
function of LKB1
LKB1 is a tumor suppressor [26], and its loss-of-
function mutations, most of which cause a loss 
of  kinase  activity,  are  an  etiological  factor  of 
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, an autosomal domi-
nant  genetic  disorder.  This  genetic  syndrome 
is  characterized  by  multiple  hamartomatous 
polyps  (benign  overgrowth  of  differentiated 

tissues) in the gastrointestinal tract and a mark-
edly  increased  risk  of  gastrointestinal  adeno-
carcinomas [26]. In addition, somatic mutations of 
the LKB1 gene have been found in several other 
cancers, for example, in approximately 34% of 
lung adenocarcinomas, 19% of squamous cell 
carcinomas and 20% of cervical carcinomas and 
other cancers [27–30]. 

Although a complete ablation of LKB1 causes 
embryonic lethality in mouse models, its hetero-
zygous deletion increases the incidence of tumor 
in  the  intestine  and  stomach  [26]  and  predis-
poses animals to carcinogenesis induced by 7,12 
dimethylbenz(a)anthracene, thereby develop-
ing squamous cell carcinoma of the skin and 
lung [31]. In addition, tissue-specific deletion of 
LKB1 in the endometrial epithelium of female 
mice or the prostate epithelium of male mice 
causes endometrial adenocarcinomas and pros-
tate neoplasia, respectively [32,33]. AMPK plays 
an  important  role  in  mediating  tumorigenic 
effects of LKB1. Thus, a hypomorphic mutation 
that decreases LKB1 markedly accelerates tumor 
development in PTEN+/- mice, whereas pharma-
cological AMPK activators significantly delay 
tumor onset [34]. In LKB1-deficient lung cancer 
cells, AMPK activity is suppressed and refrac-
tory to its pharmacological activators, leading to 
increased mTORC1 signaling, whereas the abil-
ity of AMPK to inhibit cell growth is restored 
when wild-type LKB1 is expressed [35,36]. 

Downstream targets of AMPK
The number of AMPK targets has grown rapidly 
in recent years and their biological functions have 
been discussed in great detail elsewhere [1,5,8,9]. 
In this article, we highlight only some of the 
targets that are well characterized and known to 
have important roles in tumorigenesis.

mTORC1 signaling
Many studies have established that mTOR is a 
major downstream target of AMPK (Figure 2) [5]. 
Early studies have shown that AMPK activated by 
stress or pharmacological activators inhibits pro-
tein synthesis via regulation of mTOR/S6K [37] 
and translation elongation factor 2 [38]. mTOR 
is a key component of mTORC1 and mTORC2, 
both of which have essential roles in PI3K signal-
ing [39]. While mTORC2 phosphorylates Akt at 
Ser 473, contributing to its activation, mTORC1 
integrates nutrients and growth signals to func-
tion downstream of PI3K/Akt. Upon stimulation 
of cells with growth factors, activated Akt phos-
phorylates tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2), 
which  forms  a  complex  with  TSC1  and  thus 

458

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3)

future science group

AMPK as a metabolic tumor suppressor: control of metabolism & cell growth Review

Metabolic stress

Metformin
and TZDs

AICAR and 
A769662 etc.

Adiponectin

LKB1/AMPK

FOX3

p53

SREBP1,
ACC, HMGCR
and FASN

p27

TSC2

Raptor

mTOR

Apoptosis

Autophagy

Cell growth

Cell polarity

Cancer

Figure 1. Essential Roles of LKB1/AMPK in controlling cell growth and tumorigenesis. 
LKB1/AMPK by regulating mTORC1, p53 and other important molecules control cellular processes, 
such as cell cycle checkpoint, apoptosis, autophagy and cell polarity. Dysregulation of LKB1/AMPK 
causes loss of these control points and thus leads to unrestrained growth. Only a few representative 
molecules that are directly relevant to growth control are listed here. 
TZD: Thiazolidinedione.

constitutes a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) 
for a small GTPase, RHEB, and an immediate 
activator of mTOR. This phosphorylation leads 
to inactivation of the GAP activity, causing acti-
vation of mTOR. Germinal mutations of TSC1 
or TSC2 account for another autosomal genetic 
disease, in which patients develop hamartomas 
in multiple organs, such as the brain, lung, skin, 
heart and kidney [40].

AMP-activated  protein  kinase  has  been 
shown to phosphorylate TSC2 at a different 
site to the Akt site, which primes phosphory-
lation  at  an  adjacent  site  by  GSK3,  leading 
to activation of the TSC GAP activity  [41,42]. 
In addition, AMPK has recently been shown 
to  phosphorylate  Raptor,  a  scaffold  in  the 
mTORC1  complex.  The  phosphorylation 
results in 14-3-3 binding and inactivation of 
mTORC1 [43]. Thus, AMPK exerts a dual con-
trol of mTORC1, so as to enforce a metabolic 
checkpoint in response to nutrient deprivation. 
The  identification  of  mTORC1  as  a  down-
stream target of LKB1/AMPK is of great inter-
est in cancer biology and therapy, inasmuch as 
the pathway is activated in a large number of 
tumors owing to oncogenic activation of recep-
tor-tyrosine kinase, PI3K, and loss-of-function 

mutations of PTEN [44]. Indeed, deficiency of 
LKB1 in humans and mouse models of both 
Peutz–Jeghers  syndrome  and  lung  cancer  is 
accompanied with deregulated mTORC1 activ-
ity and associated changes in gene expression, 
such as increased expression of SREBP1 and 
HIF-1a [45,46]. When tested, these tumors are 
sensitive to the inhibition of mTORC1 [35,46,47].

p53 & other tumor suppressors
Another  important  partner  of  AMPK  is  the 
tumor  suppressor  p53,  with  which  AMPK  is 
mutually regulated. On one hand, AMPK acti-
vation by AICAR or glucose deprivation leads to 
upregulation of p53 as well as its phosphoryla-
tion at Ser15 [48,49]. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts 
(MEFs) bearing wild-type p53 are arrested at 
G1/S phase by glucose deprivation, AICAR and 
expression of a constitutively activated mutant 
of AMPK, whereas the metabolic checkpoint is 
ineffective in the p53-deficient MEF cells [48]. 
We have shown that expression of a dominant 
negative mutant of the AMPK a1-subunit in 
prostate cancer cells accelerates their growth, 
concomitant  with  decreases  in  mRNA  and 
protein levels of p53  [50]. On the other hand, 
AMPK is regulated by p53. The first example 

future science group

www.futuremedicine.com

459

Review Luo, Zang & Guo

Insulin and IGF1 etc.

IRS

PI3K

Ras

Raf

KSR

MEK

ERK

AMPK

Akt

LKB1

PTEN

TSC1

TSC2

RHEB

PRAS40

R
a
p

t

o
r

mTOR

TORC1

Pharmacological 
AMPK activators

Mitogenesis

Figure 2. Interaction of AMPK with the ERK and PI3K pathways. Recent studies have 
demonstrated that the LKB1/AMPK axis functionally interacts with the mitogenic pathways: Atk could 
phosphorylate and inhibit AMPK; LKB1 is inhibited by oncogenic B-Raf in an ERK/RSK-dependent 
fashion; KSR associates with Raf/MEK, which is required for Raf/MEK activation. Recently, KSR2 has 
been shown to associate with AMPK and participate in its activation. It will be interesting to test if 
the KSR scaffolds, by tethering Raf/MEK and AMPK, play a role in determining cell growth or arrest; 
AMPK inhibits TORC1 by phosphorylating TSC2 and Raptor. This negative regulation is important, as 
TORC1 is a critical regulator for the growth of cancer cells bearing the loss-of-function mutations of 
PTEN or activating mutations of PI3K and Akt.
is the study showing that the b1-isoform of the 
regulatory subunit of AMPK is upregulated by 
p53 [51]. A second study has revealed that two 
downstream targets of p53, sestrin 1 and ses-
trin 2, are implicated in the activation of AMPK 
and concordant inhibition of mTOR [52]. These 
findings suggest that their mutual regulation 
enhances their tumor suppressive functions.

affects  its  histone  acetyl  transferase  activity 
in addition to inhibition of p300 interaction 
with  several  nuclear  receptors.  AMPK  phos-
phorylates FOXO3 and p27 at the same sites as 
Akt. However, phosphorylation by Atk elicits 
a negative effect on their function, in contrast 
to the positive net effect imposed by AMPK. 
Hence, it cannot be excluded that mechanisms 
other than direct phosphorylation account for 
AMPK’s effects on these molecules.

In addition, AMPK has been shown to phos-
phorylate  and/or  regulate  several  other  mol-
ecules that regulate cell metabolism, growth, 
survival and autophagy, such as p300 histone 
acetyltransferase  [53],  FOXO3  [54]  and  the 
cell  cycle  inhibitor  p27  [55,56].  It  is  not  clear 
whether  AMPK  phosphorylation  of  p300 

Enzymes for fatty acid 
& cholesterol synthesis
AMP-activated protein kinase was first identi-
fied as a kinase that phosphorylates and inhibits 

460

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3)

future science group

AMPK as a metabolic tumor suppressor: control of metabolism & cell growth Review

acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC) and HMG-CoA 
reductase, rate-limiting enzymes for  de novo 
synthesis of fatty acid and cholesterol, respec-
tively. Both of these enzymes have important 
roles in tumorigenesis. In keeping with this, 
statins, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors that 
lower cholesterol levels, have been suggested 
to prevent cancer in experimental models and 
reduce  cancer  risk  in  humans  [57,58].  FASN, 
ACC and other enzymes required for de novo 
synthesis of free fatty acid and cholesterol are 
highly expressed in several types of cancers, 
including those arising from the breast, pros-
tate,  colon  and  ovary  [59,60].  The  increase  of 
these enzymes is attributed to increased expres-
sion and maturation of SREBP-1 and SREBP-2, 
which  are  transcription  factors.  AMPK  has 
been shown to inhibit SREBP1 [61]. However, 
the mechanism is not fully understood. One 
possible mechanism is through the inhibition 
of  mTOR  [45].  It  has  been  reported  that  the 
inhibition of FASN activity by pharmacological 
agents or by siRNA attenuates proliferation of 
cancer cells and causes their apoptosis  [62,63]. 
Thus, in light of these findings and the clinical 
observations that it is upregulated in cancer, 
FASN is regarded as a metabolic oncogene [60]. 
Interestingly,  pharmacological  inhibition  of 
FASN in human ovarian cancer cells leads to 
a rapid activation of AMPK, followed by the 
induction  of  cytotoxicity  [64].  The  cytotoxic 
effect is suppressed by compound C, a chemical 
inhibitor of AMPK. Although further studies 
using molecular approaches are needed, these 
findings suggest that AMPK mediates the effect 
of pharmacological inhibition of FASN. 

AMPK: journey from metabolic syndrome 
to cancer
Metabolic  syndrome  is  a  combination  of 
metabolic disorders such as insulin resistance, 
hyperinsulinemia  and  proinflammatory  and 
procoagulant changes that increase the risk of 
cardiovascular  disease  and  diabetes.  Studies 
from  both  human  and  rodents  have  shown 
that metabolic disorders, such as insulin resis-
tance, obesity and Type 2 diabetes, are accom-
panied  by  decreases  in  AMPK  activity,  and 
that activation of AMPK by ACIAR, TZDs, 
metformin, polyphenols and exercise can cor-
rect or prevent these disorders [2,65–68]. Of note, 
AMPK activation stimulates fatty acid oxida-
tion, which sounds paradoxical to its use in the 
treatment of diabetes and metabolic syndrome, 
as increased fatty acid oxidation may lead to 
ketosis. It should be pointed out that ketosis is 

not as severe for Type 2 diabetes as for Type 1 
diabetes. In Type 1 diabetes, peripheral tissues 
burn more fat as an alternative fuel source to 
compensate for the shortage of glucose in the 
absence  of  insulin,  which  results  in  intoler-
able  increases  in  ketone  bodies.  By  contrast, 
in Type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome, 
the  major  problems  are  insulin  resistance  in 
liver, muscle and adipose tissue (e.g., increased 
hepatic glucose production and decreased glu-
cose uptake in skeletal muscle), and increased 
proinflammatory response in the cardio vascular 
system  [2]. AMPK activation has been shown 
to mitigate all of these abnormalities. In fact, 
no severe ketosis has been found as a side effect 
of metformin and TZDs in the treatment of 
Type 2 diabetes.

In recent years, metabolic syndrome has been 
found to be associated with cancer, and new evi-
dence suggests that AMPK could play a bridging 
role, as illustrated in Figure 3.

AMPK: a key regulator to link metabolic 
syndrome & cancer 
A large body of epidemiological studies has indi-
cated that metabolic syndrome is a risk factor 
for many types of cancer and is associated with 
increased mortality and poor prog nosis [69–72]. 
Likewise,  the  association  between  metabolic 
syndrome and tumorigenesis has also been dem-
onstrated by experimental studies [73–75]. Using a 
tumor xenograft mouse model in which obesity 
and insulin resistance is induced with a high-fat 
diet, Yakar et al. have shown that tumor growth 
is significantly increased in obese mice [73]. A 
second line of evidence came from the study 
with a fatless mouse model, where the expression 
of the transgene A-ZIP/F-1, encoding a domi-
nant negative protein that prevents the DNA-
binding of B-ZIP transcription factors of both 
C/EBP and Jun families, is under the control of 
the adipose-specific aP2 enhancer/promoter [74]. 
The transgenic mice without white fat but with 
increased ectopic adiposity developed typical 
symptoms of metabolic syndrome and diabetes. 
The mice are susceptible to skin carcinogenesis 
induced by 7,12 dimethylbenz(a) anthracene, 
and the development of breast cancer is acceler-
ated when they are crossed with transgenic mice 
expressing the SV40 large tumor antigen trans-
forming sequences in their mammary glands. 
The increased carcinogenesis and tumori genesis 
is probably attributed to the metabolic disorders 
engendered by hyper insulemia. This possibil-
ity  is  corroborated  by  a  recent  elegant  study 
by Fierz et al.  [75]. In this study, a dominant 

future science group

www.futuremedicine.com

461

Review Luo, Zang & Guo

Metabolic syndrome

Insulin and IGF1

AMPK

p53

Proliferation,
hyperplasia
and malignancy

Mutations:
PTEN, PI3K, LKB1, 
Ras and B-Raf

mTORC1
and FASN

Figure 3. Suppression of AMPK results in loss of metabolic checkpoints. AMPK could be suppressed in metabolic syndrome and 
by activated Akt owing to mutation of PTEN or PI3K, or activated ERK/RSK due to Ras or B-Raf, leading to a loss of metabolic 
checkpoints. Likewise, increased insulin and IGF1 associated with metabolic syndrome can inhibit AMPK and stimulate cell proliferation, 
hyperplasia and malignant growth of cancer cells.

negative mutant of the IGF1 receptor is specifi-
cally expressed in skeletal muscle of transgenic 
mice (MKR+/+), which results in insulin resis-
tance and diabetes [76]. When the MKR+/+ mice 
are crossed with mice expressing the Polyoma 
Virus middle T oncongene in the mammary 
gland  or  are  orthotopically  inoculated  with 
mouse tumor cells, tumor growth is markedly 
enhanced. Intriguingly, treatment of animals 
with CL-316243, a potent insulin sensitizing 
drug that specifically activates the b3-adrenergic 
receptor, significantly reduced the elevated insu-
lin levels in MKR+/+ mice and concomitantly 
attenuated mammary tumor progression [75]. 

Thus far, both the animal and epidemiological 
studies support the contention that metabolic 
syndrome increases the risk of cancer and that 
correction of the metabolic disorders could be 
beneficial to cancer prevention and treatment. 
AMPK is a likely benevolent candidate to fulfill 
the latter mission. Indeed, this idea is supported 
by recent studies. First, retrospective investiga-
tions have reported that patients with Type 2 
diabetes taking metformin display a reduced risk 
of cancer as compared with the normal popula-
tion or with the patients who have never taken 
metformin [77,78], and a reduced trend of mortal-
ity compared with patients who take sulfonyl-
ureas or insulin [79]. In addition, reduced levels 
of adiponectin have been found in the plasma 
of patients with some cancers (e.g., breast and 

prostate cancers), and treatment of cancer cells 
with adipo nectin attenuated their growth, an 
event that is blocked by the dominant negative 
mutant of AMPK [80–83]. Finally, a large num-
ber of studies have shown that maneuvers that 
activate AMPK, such as treatment with pharma-
cological agents (e.g., AICAR, metformin and 
TZDs),  exercise  and  dietary  restriction,  can 
attenuate cancer cell growth in vitro and inhibit 
tumor development in vivo [34,36,84–87]. 

Dysregulation of AMPK in cancer
In  addition  to  loss-of-function  mutations  of 
LKB1  in  Peutz–Jeghers  syndrome  and  can-
cers, AMPK could be suppressed by oncogenic 
mutations (Figure 2). Previous studies have shown 
that AMPK is phosphorylated and inhibited by 
insulin-activated Akt [88]. However, this has not 
been reported in cancer cells containing consti-
tutively activated Akt. Additionally, the mRNA 
levels of AMPKa2 inversely correlate with clini-
cal prognosis in breast and ovarian tumors, and 
are diminished in cancer cells by activated PI3K 
pathways  [89]. Since Akt is activated in many 
cancer cells where PTEN is inactivated or PI3K 
is constitutively activated, it will be interesting 
to expand the study by examining more human 
tumor specimens. In fact, recent investigations, 
despite their limited number, shed light on this 
direction [90,91]. One report showed that AMPK 
activation is reduced in lung cancer specimens 

462

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3)

future science group

AMPK as a metabolic tumor suppressor: control of metabolism & cell growth Review

containing  loss-of-function  mutations  of 
LKB1  [91]. A second study examined the acti-
vation status of AMPK in breast cancer speci-
mens and showed that both phospho-AMPK 
and phospho-ACC signals were reduced, which 
inversely correlates with histological grade and 
axilliary node metastasis  [90]. It has not been 
investigated if the reduction of AMPK activ-
ity correlates with metabolic status of the breast 
cancer patients. 

Recently, two independent studies have indi-
cated that LKB1 is inhibited by an active mutant 
of B-Raf, an event mediated by ERK1/2 [92,93]. 
Intriguingly, opposite changes between phos-
phorylation of ERK and AMPK were observed 
in melanoma specimens [92]. This finding may 
have an important clinical implication, inas-
much as activating mutation of B-Raf accounts 
for approximately 6% of human cancer, with 
the highest incidence in malignant melanoma 
(50–70%)  [94]. Furthermore, ERK1/2 is con-
stitutively activated in cancer cells containing 
Ras mutations, which is found in 20–30% of 
human cancers [95]. 

A more complex inter-relationship between 
the  mitogenic  and  metabolic  pathways  is 
highlighted by a most recent discovery of the 
interaction between kinase suppressor of ras 2 
(KSR2) and AMPK [96]. KSR1 and KSR2 are 
best known for their scaffold function for the 
Raf/MEK/ERK signaling cascade, facilitating 
the activation of Raf and MEK [97,98]. Costanzo-
Garvey et al. have found that AMPK associates 
with  KSR1  and  KSR2  with  more  preference 
toward the latter [96]. Knockout of the mouse 
KSR2 gene causes obesity and insulin resistance. 
More interestingly, AMPK activation by AICAR 
is diminished in MEF cells isolated from the 
KSR2 knockout mouse. KSR2 binds to AMPK 
and Raf/MEK through different domains: while 
AMPK  binds  to  the  domain  near  or  super-
imposed with the membrane targeting domain, 
the binding sites for Raf and MEK are located to 
a more carboxy  terminal region of KSR2 [96,99]. 
Hence, it is tempting to speculate that KSR2 
functions as a switching point of cell fate for 
mitogenesis and metabolic checkpoint if all these 
proteins coexist in the same complex. In prolif-
erating cells, KSR2 brings an active MEK/ERK 
complex to AMPK, preventing its activation by 
LKB1  (as  illustrated  in  Figure  2).  Conversely, 
under metabolic stress, binding of AMPK to 
KSR2  prevents  Raf/MEK  to  be  targeted  to 
the  plasma  membrane  for  their  activation. 
Alternatively,  KSR2  could  form  independent 
complexes with AMPK and Raf/MEK.

AMPK & glucose metabolism in 
cancer cells
One of the prominent traits of cancer cells is 
aerobic glycolysis, which was first described by 
Otta Warburg in the 1920s [100]. Regardless of 
adequate  oxygen  supply,  cancer  cells  rely  on 
the glycolysis that takes place in the cytosol 
over  oxidative  phosphorylation  in  the  mito-
chondria,  although  the  former  is  much  less 
efficient at generating ATP. It is still not clear 
whether the switching of ATP-producing sys-
tems  is  causal  or  consequent  to  malignancy. 
Nonetheless, increased glycolysis offers many 
growth advantages to cancer cells in addition 
to adaptation of hypoxia tumor microenviron-
ment  [101]. For example, the high rate of gly-
colysis is not just required for the production 
of ATP to compensate for impaired oxidative 
phosphorylation in mitochondria, but it is also 
important to provide intermediates for anabolic 
processes, including biosynthesis of glycogen, 
amino acids, nucleic acids, and lipids  [101,102]. 
Second, increased glycolysis in tumor cells is 
accompanied by increased stability of the mito-
chondrial membrane. This is partly ascribed to 
mitochondria membrane associated-hexokinase 
(HK) I or II, which is upregulated in tumors. 
As a result, leakage of cytochrome C into the 
cytosol and subsequent activation of caspases 
are prevented. As such, cancer cells are resistant 
to apoptosis invoked by the intrinsic pathway. 
Third, increased secretion of lactic acid creates 
an extracellular acidic milieu, which is advan-
tageous  for  cancer  cell  invasion  but  toxic  to 
normal cells. 

Complex mechanisms are involved in the adap-
tation of cancer cells to glycolysis. Two impor-
tant modulators relevant to AMPK are HIF-1 
and p53 (Figure 4). HIF-1 is a transcription factor 
that is activated by hypoxic, oncogenic and other 
stresses [103]. HIF-1 is a heterodimer consisting 
of two subunits, a and b. The a-subunits are 
degraded under normoxic conditions owing to 
the sequential action of oxygen-dependent pro-
lyl tryoxylases and the von Hippel-Lindau E3 
ubiquitin ligase. Under hypoxic conditions, von 
Hippel-Lindau is inactivated, leading to stabili-
zation of HIF-1a, which stimulates expression 
of modulators required for glycolysis, including 
glucose transporter 1, HK1 and HK2, lactate 
dehydrogenase  and  pyruvate  dehydgrogenase 
kinase. The latter phosphorylates and inhibits 
pyruvate dehydrogenase, leading to a decrease 
in pyruvate entering mitochondria for oxidation. 
Therefore, the characteristic increases of glucose 
uptake and glycolysis in tumors distinguishes 

future science group

www.futuremedicine.com

463

Review Luo, Zang & Guo

AMPK

PFK2

p53

mTOR

ACC2

PGM

TIGAR

HIF1α

Fatty acid
oxidation

Glycolysis

Warburg effect

Figure 4. AMPK plays a role in reprogramming energy metabolism. AMPK activation could 
have two effects on energy metabolisms: acute effect, AMPK that is activated under metabolic 
stress, such as hypoxia, ischemia and glucose deprivation, stimulates fatty acid oxidation and, in some 
circumstances, such as in the heart, enhances glycolysis to generate more ATP; chronic effect, AMPK 
may inhibit glycolysis via its action on mTOR and p53. Thus, suppression of AMPK in some cancer 
might result in increased glycolysis, which may contribute to the Warburg effect.

them from normal tissues, thereby offering a 
tracing  advantage  by  18F  2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-
glucose PET scanning, and these characteristic 
increases  are  also  targeting  points  for  cancer 
therapy [104].

AMP-activated protein kinase has been impli-
cated in the regulation of HIF1a. This may be 
mediated by its action on mTORC1 [105]. Thus, 
in LKB1- or AMPK-deficient fibroblasts, the 
levels of HIF1a and its downstream targets are 
elevated, which is diminished by rapa mycin [46]. 
A similar increase of HIF1a is also found in the 
epithelia of gastrointestinal hamartomas from 
LKB1+/- mice  [46]. These studies suggest that 
AMPK suppresses glycolysis in tumor cells by 
inhibiting mTOR. However, AMPK has also 
been shown to stimulate glycolysis in ischemic 
hearts by activating a cardiac specific enzyme, 
phosphofructo kinase 2 (PFK2) [106]. In addi-
tion, studies have asserted that AMPK activa-
tion upregulates HIF-1a and VEGF expression 

in  hypoxia  [107,108].  Thus,  it  needs  to  clarify 
whether these findings are reflective of acute 
stress response and examine whether the net 
effect of these opposite regulations by AMPK 
depends on cellular context and metabolic state 
of the cells. 

Another paradigm of AMPK regulation of 
glycolysis is its possible action on p53. In addi-
tion to regulating cell growth and apoptosis, 
p53 has been recently implicated in the regula-
tion of glyco lysis and mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphory lation through at least three mecha-
nisms  [109]. First, p53 positively regulates the 
expression  of  the  protein  synthesis  of  cyto-
chrome C oxidase 2 (SCO2), a key regulator 
of cytochrome C oxidase complex that is essen-
tial for mitochondrial respiration [110]. Second, 
p53 stimulates transcription of TP53-induced 
glycolysis and apoptosis regulator (TIGAR), a 
molecule that shares functional similarities with 
the bisphosphatase domain of the bifunctional 

464

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3)

future science group

AMPK as a metabolic tumor suppressor: control of metabolism & cell growth Review

enzyme  6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-
2,6-bisphosphatase  [111]. Thus, the upregula-
tion of TIGAR leads to a decrease in the levels 
of  fructose-2,6-phosphates,  thereby  inhibit-
ing glyco lysis. Third, p53 downregulates the 
expression of phosphoglycerate mutase, another 
key  enzyme  in  the  glycolytic  path way  [112]. 
Collectively, the net effect of p53 mutation is 
to enhance glyco lysis. Therefore, AMPK, via 
regulating p53, could inhibit aerobic glycolysis 
and thus diminish the utilization of glycolytic 
intermediates for the biosynthesis of building 
blocks of cancer cells (e.g., protein, lipid and 
nucleic acids). However, data directly linking 
AMPK, p53 and glycolysis are currently still 
in scarcity.

Implication of AMPK in cancer 
prevention & treatment
Many studies have shown that exercise, AICAR 
and  metformin,  all  of  which  cause  AMPK 
activation, reduce insulin secretion and IGF1 
production  and  alleviate  hyperlipidemia  and 
hyperglycemia [50,65,113–118]. We have provided 
direct  evidence  that  AICAR  suppresses  the 
expression of IGF1 and its receptor in prostate 
cancer  cells,  while  expression  of  the  domi-
nant negative mutant of AMPK causes their 
upregulation  [50]. In addition, AMPK reduces 
reactive  oxidation  species,  which  can  cause 
DNA damage and thus induce mutagenesis [3]. 
Hence, these studies suggest an important role 
of AMPK in tumor prevention. As noted ear-
lier, this notion is supported by several recent 
epidemiological investigations in patients with 
Type 2 diabetes receiving metformin treatment 
and experimental studies using animal models.
AMP-activated protein kinase might also be 
a promising target for cancer therapy, as many 
recent studies have shown that pharmacologi-
cal activators of AMPK, such as metformin, 
phenformin, AICAR and A769662, inhibit or 
delay the onset of tumors in animal models. 
Interestingly,  one  clinical  study  assessed  the 
response of breast cancer patients with diabe-
tes to nonadjuvant chemotherapy in combina-
tion  with  metformin  or  with  nonmetformin 
anti diabetic drugs and demonstrated that the 
patients  receiving  metformin  showed  com-
plete pathological responses [119]. This finding 
is  intriguing  and  warrants  further  investiga-
tion. Indeed, an expanded use of metformin as 
an adjuvant in the treatment of breast cancer 
patients with or without diabetes is progress-
ing at the Phase III clinical trial  [120]. As an 
adjuvant of cancer therapy, several factors may 

determine the efficacy of pharmacological acti-
vators of AMPK and response to the treatment. 
For example, the presence of LKB1 is critical for 
the response of cancer cells to AMPK-targeted 
treatment. AMPK is unable to be activated by 
many pharmacological agents in the absence 
of LKB1 unless they directly bind to and acti-
vate  AMPK.  In  some  cancer  cells,  failure  of 
AMPK activation may be beneficial to therapy, 
as it sensitizes the cells to apoptosis induced 
by chemotherapeutic agents  [121]. Second, the 
cells containing hyperactive downstream tar-
gets of AMPK might be especially sensitive to 
AMPK activators when LKB1 is present. These 
include cancer cells containing hyperactivated 
mTORC1 and upregulated FASN [34,36,64]. In 
addition, the status of p53 might also be a deter-
mining factor. In keeping with this, a recent 
study has shown that metformin induces apop-
tosis of p53-null HCT116 colon cancer cells and 
selectively suppresses the growth of xenografts 
derived from these cells [87]. By contrast, met-
formin  or  AICAR  fails  to  inhibit  the  tumor 
growth of HCT116 cells containing wild-type 
p53 but, instead, elicits autophagy [87]. However, 
another study has reported that p53 plays a criti-
cal role in mediating AMPK-induced apoptosis 
of thymocytes in response to glucose depriva-
tion [122]. These results may reflect differences 
in cell types, but points to different treatment 
regimens  needed  to  be  considered  when  the 
genetic context varies. 

Conclusion
In  summation,  AMPK  appears  to  serve  as 
a  metabolic  tumor  suppressor  to  keep  cell 
metabolism and growth at appropriate levels. 
Thus, in response to energy stress in the micro-
environment of tumors, AMPK activation may 
lead to the reprogramming of cellular metabo-
lism and elicits a metabolic checkpoint on the 
cell cycle through its action on mTORC1, p53 
and other modulators for cell growth and sur-
vival. The checkpoint presumably allows a cell 
to fix the problems. Thus, when it is lost, the 
cell will undergo two directions of fate: apop-
tosis or unrestrained growth. In this regard, 
it is of no doubt that AMPK is a promising 
target for cancer prevention. Moreover, many 
lines of evidence suggest that AMPK could also 
serve as a target for cancer therapy, which will 
require more support from both preclinical and 
clinical investigations. The clinical study is just 
at its beginning, and hopefully, more exciting 
outcomes are expected to come along in the 
near future.

future science group

www.futuremedicine.com

465

Review Luo, Zang & Guo

Future perspective
A great deal of experimental studies support the 
notion that AMPK is an important mediator 
of LKB1 in inhibiting cancer cell growth and 
tumorigenesis. It is noteworthy, however, that 
unlike LKB1, AMPK may not have emerged as 
a tumor suppressor by genetic studies, which 
is probably attributed to redundancy between 
the multiple isoforms [123,124]. Thus, to further 
delineate  the  tumor  suppressive  function  of 
AMPK, it will be interesting to cross the AMPK 
a1 or a2 null mice or transgenic mice express-
ing the dominant negative mutant of AMPK 
a-subunit with p53 or PTEN-null mice and test 
whether ablation of AMPK accelerates tumor 
development or whether deletion of the AMPK 
a-genes increases the susceptibility to carcino-
genesis. Another important direction will be 
to gain more evidence on AMPK dysregulaton 
in tumor microenvironment caused by meta-
bolic or genetic changes. Inspired by the epi-
demiological studies showing the reduced risk 
of  cancer  and  improved  prognosis  in  breast 
cancer patients with diabetes who have taken 
metformin and in vitro studies using animal 
models with AMPK activators, extended studies 
of metformin use as an adjuvant to cancer ther-
apy will hopefully be launched soon. An attrac-
tive reason to consider AMPK as a therapeu-
tic target is the fact that two pharmacological 
activators, metformin and TZDs, have already 
been used in the clinical treatment of Type 2 
diabetes, and tolerance of their side effects has 

been  documented.  Since  metformin  inhibits 
Complex I of the respiratory chain, one of its 
side effects is the production of lactic acidosis. 
Owing to the fatal acidosis side effect, phenfor-
min, a potent analog of metformin, has been 
removed from the market in the USA. Although 
metformin also produces this side effect, it is to 
a much lower degree that is within the tolerable 
range. Furthermore, it is reasonable to expect 
more AMPK activators with higher specificity 
and potency to appear in the market in the near 
future. We should be aware that, as tumors have 
high degrees of heterogeneity, different genetic 
backgrounds may determine the sensitivity and 
efficacy, and the combination of AMPK activa-
tors with other treatment regimens will always 
be a better choice. Lastly and not surprisingly, 
as tremendous interest is invested, more AMPK 
targets and new functions will be identified.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Ms Rong Tao and Miss Laura Stevens 
for checking typographical and grammatical errors. 

Financial & competing interests disclosure
This work is supported by an NIH grant (R01CA118918 
to Zhijun Luo). The authors have no other relevant 
affiliations or financial involvement with any organi-
zation or entity with a financial interest in or financial 
conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed 
in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.

No writing assistance was utilized in the production 

of this manuscript.

Executive summary
n	AMPK serves as a critical downstream substrate of LKB1, a tumor suppressor whose mutations are found in Peutz–Jeghers syndrome 

and cancer. 

n	AMPK has emerged as a therapeutic target for metabolic syndrome and Type 2 diabetes. 
n	AMPK can be suppressed in metabolic syndrome, which is a risk factor for cancer, and by oncogenic activation of the  

Raf/ERK/RSK pathway.

n	Activation of AMPK by energy shortage (e.g., hypoxia and low levels of nutrients) reprograms cellular metabolism and enforces a 

metabolic checkpoint on the cell cycle. Loss of such a checkpoint could lead to unrestrained cell growth.

n	AMPK may function as a metabolic tumor suppressor regulating glucose, lipid and protein metabolism. It does so by acting on 

mTORC1, p53 and FASN. 

n	AMPK is a promising target for cancer prevention and therapy. 

3.  Luo Z, Saha AK, Xiang X, Ruderman NB: 

6.  Wang W, Guan KL: AMP-activated protein 

Bibliography
Papers of special note have been highlighted as:
n  of interest
nn  of considerable interest

1. 

Steinberg GR, Kemp BE: AMPK in health 
and Disease. Physiol. Rev. 89(3), 1025–1078 
(2009).

2.  Ruderman N, Prentki M: AMP kinase and 

5. 

malonyl-CoA: targets for therapy of the 
metabolic syndrome. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 
3(4), 340–351 (2004).

AMPK, the metabolic syndrome and 
cancer. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 26(2), 69–76 
(2005).

7. 

4.  Hoyer-Hansen M, Jaattela M: AMP-activated 

protein kinase: a universal regulator of 
autophagy? Autophagy 3(4), 381–383 (2007).
Shackelford DB, Shaw RJ: The LKB1–AMPK 
pathway: metabolism and growth control in 
tumour suppression. Nat. Rev. Cancer 9(8), 
563–575 (2009).

kinase and cancer. Acta Physiol. (Oxf.) 196(1), 
55–63 (2009).

Jansen M, Ten Klooster JP, Offerhaus GJ, 
Clevers H: LKB1 and AMPK family signaling: 
the intimate link between cell polarity and 
energy metabolism. Physiol. Rev. 89(3), 
777–798 (2009).

8.  Hardie DG: AMP-activated/SNF1 protein 

kinases: conserved guardians of cellular energy. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8(10), 774–785 (2007).

466

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3)

future science group

AMPK as a metabolic tumor suppressor: control of metabolism & cell growth Review

9.  Carling D, Sanders MJ, Woods A: 

The regulation of AMP-activated protein 
kinase by upstream kinases. Int. J. Obes. 
(Lond). 32(Suppl. 4), S55–S59 (2008).

10.  Davies SP, Helps NR, Cohen PT, Hardie DG: 
5´-AMP inhibits dephosphorylation, as well as 
promoting phosphorylation, of the AMP-
activated protein kinase. Studies using 
bacterially expressed human protein 
phosphatase-2C a and native bovine protein 
phosphatase-2AC. FEBS Lett. 377(3), 421–425 
(1995).

11.  Sanders MJ, Grondin PO, Hegarty BD, 

Snowden MA, Carling D: Investigating the 
mechanism for AMP activation of the 
AMP-activated protein kinase cascade. 
Biochem. J. 403(1), 139–148 (2007).

12.  Woods A, Johnstone SR, Dickerson K et al.: 

LKB1 is the upstream kinase in the AMP-
activated protein kinase cascade. Curr. Biol. 
13(22), 2004–2008 (2003).

13.  Hawley SA, Boudeau J, Reid JL et al.: 
Complexes between the LKB1 tumor 
suppressor, STRAD a/b and MO25 a/b are 
upstream kinases in the AMP-activated protein 
kinase cascade. J. Biol. 2(4), 28 (2003).

n	 One of the first two studies to 

independently show that LKB1 is an AMPK 
kinase. The study also shows that LKB1 
requires accessory subunits STRAD 
and MO25. 

14.  Suter M, Riek U, Tuerk R, Schlattner U, 

Wallimann T, Neumann D: Dissecting the 
role of 5´-AMP for allosteric stimulation, 
activation, and deactivation of AMP-activated 
protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 281(43), 
32207–32216 (2006).

15.  Zhang BB, Zhou G, Li C: AMPK: 

an emerging drug target for diabetes and the 
metabolic syndrome. Cell Metab. 9(5), 
407–416 (2009).

16.  Minokoshi Y, Kim YB, Peroni OD et al.: 
Leptin stimulates fatty-acid oxidation by 
activating AMP-activated protein kinase. 
Nature 415(6869), 339–343 (2002).

17.  Minokoshi Y, Alquier T, Furukawa N et al.: 

AMP-kinase regulates food intake by 
responding to hormonal and nutrient signals in 
the hypothalamus. Nature 428(6982), 
569–574 (2004).

18.  Hong SP, Leiper FC, Woods A, Carling D, 

Carlson M: Activation of yeast Snf1 and 
mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase by 
upstream kinases. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
100(15), 8839–8843 (2003).

n	 One of the first two studies to independently 

show that LKB1 is an AMPK kinase. 

19.  Shaw RJ, Kosmatka M, Bardeesy N et al.: 

The tumor suppressor LKB1 kinase directly 
activates AMP-activated kinase and regulates 

apoptosis in response to energy stress. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101(10), 3329–3335 
(2004).

n	 One of the earliest studies to report that 

LKB1 is an AMPK kinase.

20.  Hawley SA, Pan DA, Mustard KJ et al.: 
Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
kinase-b is an alternative upstream kinase for 
AMP-activated protein kinase. Cell Metab. 
2(1), 9–19 (2005).

21.  Woods A, Dickerson K, Heath R et al.: 

Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
kinase-b acts upstream of AMP-activated 
protein kinase in mammalian cells. Cell 
Metab. 2(1), 21–33 (2005).

32.  Contreras CM, Gurumurthy S, Haynie JM 

et al.: Loss of LKB1 provokes highly invasive 
endometrial adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res. 
68(3), 759–766 (2008).

33.  Pearson HB, McCarthy A, Collins CM, 

Ashworth A, Clarke AR: LKB1 deficiency 
causes prostate neoplasia in the mouse. 
Cancer Res. 68(7), 2223–2232 (2008).

34.  Huang X, Wullschleger S, Shpiro N et al.: 

Important role of the LKB1–AMPK pathway 
in suppressing tumorigenesis in PTEN-
deficient mice. Biochem. J. 412(2), 211–221 
(2008).

n	 Demonstrates that AMPK mediates LKB1 

to inhibit tumorigenesis.

22.  Xie M, Zhang D, Dyck JR et al.: A pivotal 

role for endogenous TGF-b-activated kinase-1 
in the LKB1/AMP-activated protein kinase 
energy-sensor pathway. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 103(46), 17378–17383 (2006).

23.  Momcilovic M, Hong SP, Carlson M: 

35.  Carretero J, Medina PP, Blanco R et al.: 
Dysfunctional AMPK activity, signalling 
through mTOR and survival in response to 
energetic stress in LKB1-deficient lung 
cancer. Oncogene 26(11), 1616–1625 (2007).
36.  Xiang X, Saha AK, Wen R, Ruderman NB, 

Mammalian TAK1 activates Snf1 protein 
kinase in yeast and phosphorylates AMP-
activated protein kinase in vitro. J. Biol. 
Chem. 281(35), 25336–25343 (2006).

24.  Suzuki A, Kusakai G, Kishimoto A et al.: 
IGF-1 phosphorylates AMPK-a subunit in 
ATM-dependent and LKB1-independent 
manner. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
324(3), 986–992 (2004).

25.  Herrero-Martin G, Hoyer-Hansen M, 

Garcia-Garcia C, Fumarola C, Farkas T, 
Lopez-Rivas A et al.: TAK1 activates 
AMPK-dependent cytoprotective autophagy 
in TRAIL-treated epithelial cells. EMBO J. 
28(6), 677–685 (2009).

26.  Alessi DR, Sakamoto K, Bayascas JR: 

LKB1-dependent signaling pathways. Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 75, 137–163 (2006).

27.  Sanchez-Cespedes M, Parrella P, Esteller M 

et al.: Inactivation of LKB1/STK11 is a 
common event in adenocarcinomas of the 
lung. Cancer Res. 62(13), 3659–3662 (2002).

28.  Ji H, Ramsey MR, Hayes DN et al.: 

LKB1 modulates lung cancer differentiation 
and metastasis. Nature 448(7155), 807–810 
(2007).

29.  Wingo SN, Gallardo TD, Akbay EA et al.: 
Somatic LKB1 mutations promote cervical 
cancer progression. PLoS One 4(4), E5137 
(2009).

30.  Ikediobi ON, Davies H, Bignell G et al.: 

Mutation ana lysis of 24 known cancer genes 
in the NCI-60 cell line set. Mol. Cancer Ther. 
5(11), 2606–2612 (2006).

31.  Gurumurthy S, Hezel AF, Sahin E, 

Berger JH, Bosenberg MW, Bardeesy N: 
LKB1 deficiency sensitizes mice to 
carcinogen-induced tumorigenesis. 
Cancer Res. 68(1), 55–63 (2008).

Luo Z: AMP-activated protein kinase 
activators can inhibit the growth of prostate 
cancer cells by multiple mechanisms. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 321(1), 
161–167 (2004).

37.  Bolster DR, Crozier SJ, Kimball SR, 

Jefferson LS: AMP-activated protein kinase 
suppresses protein synthesis in rat skeletal 
muscle through down-regulated mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling. 
J. Biol. Chem. 277(27), 23977–23980 (2002).

38.  Horman S, Browne G, Krause U et al.: 

Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase 
leads to the phosphorylation of elongation 
factor 2 and an inhibition of protein 
synthesis. Curr. Biol. 12(16), 1419–1423 
(2002).

39.  Guertin DA, Sabatini DM: Defining the role 
of mTOR in cancer. Cancer Cell 12(1), 9–22 
(2007).

40.  Gomez MR: Phenotypes of the tuberous 

sclerosis complex with a revision of diagnostic 
criteria. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 615, 1–7 (1991).

41.  Inoki K, Ouyang H, Zhu T et al.: 

TSC2 integrates Wnt and energy signals via a 
coordinated phosphorylation by AMPK and 
GSK3 to regulate cell growth. Cell 126(5), 
955–968 (2006).

42.  Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL: TSC2 mediates 

cellular energy response to control cell 
growth and survival. Cell 115(5), 577–590 
(2003).

n	

Shows cooperation between the Wnt 
signaling and AMPK sensing pathways in 
controlling mTOR.

43.  Gwinn DM, Shackelford DB, Egan DF et al.: 
AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a 
metabolic checkpoint. Mol. Cell 30(2), 
214–226 (2008).

future science group

www.futuremedicine.com

467

Review Luo, Zang & Guo

n	 Describes that AMPK phosphorylates 

nn	 p53 downstream targets also regulate 

65.  Zang M, Xu S, Maitland-Toolan KA et al.: 

Raptor and inhibits mTOR, illustrating 
another mechanism by which AMPK 
dictates protein synthesis, metabolic 
checkpoint and cell growth.

AMPK, resulting in inhibition of mTOR. 
Thus, the study integrates the growth and 
metabolic controls by tethering 
p53–sestrin–AMPK–mTOR.

44.  Engelman JA: Targeting PI3K signalling in 

cancer: opportunities, challenges and 
limitations. Nat. Rev. Cancer 9(8), 550–562 
(2009).

45.  Porstmann T, Santos CR, Griffiths B et al.: 

SREBP activity is regulated by mTORC1 and 
contributes to Akt-dependent cell growth. Cell 
Metab. 8(3), 224–236 (2008).

46.  Shackelford DB, Vasquez DS, Corbeil J et al.: 

mTOR and HIF-1a-mediated tumor 
metabolism in an LKB1 mouse model of 
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 106(27), 11137–11142 (2009).

n	

Shows that AMPK inhibits glycolysis via its 
action on mTOR, which may play a role in 
controlling the Warburg effect in tumors.

47.  Shaw RJ, Bardeesy N, Manning BD et al.: 

The LKB1 tumor suppressor negatively 
regulates mTOR signaling. Cancer Cell 6(1), 
91–99 (2004).

48.  Jones RG, Plas DR, Kubek S et al.: 

AMP-activated protein kinase induces a 
p53-dependent metabolic checkpoint. 
Mol. Cell 18(3), 283–293 (2005).

n	 Characterizes in great detail the fact 
that activation of AMPK by energy 
deprivation activates p53, inducing the 
metabolic checkpoint.

49.  Imamura K, Ogura T, Kishimoto A, 

Kaminishi M, Esumi H: Cell cycle regulation 
via p53 phosphorylation by a 5´-AMP 
activated protein kinase activator, 
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-b-D-
ribofuranoside, in a human hepatocellular 
carcinoma cell line. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 287(2), 562–567 (2001).

n	 First report to show that AMPK 

phosphorylates and activates p53 and 
induces cell cycle arrest.

50.  Zhou J, Huang W, Tao R et al.: 

Inactivation of AMPK alters gene expression 
and promotes growth of prostate cancer cells. 
Oncogene 28(18), 1993–2002 (2009).
51.  Feng Z, Hu W, de Stanchina E et al.: 

The regulation of AMPK b1, TSC2, and 
PTEN expression by p53: stress, cell and 
tissue specificity, and the role of these gene 
products in modulating the IGF-1-AKT-
mTOR pathways. Cancer Res. 67(7), 
3043–3053 (2007).

52.  Budanov AV, Karin M: p53 target genes 

sestrin1 and sestrin2 connect genotoxic stress 
and mTOR signaling. Cell 134(3), 451–460 
(2008).

53.  Yang W, Hong YH, Shen XQ, Frankowski C, 
Camp HS, Leff T: Regulation of transcription 
by AMP-activated protein kinase: 
phosphorylation of p300 blocks its interaction 
with nuclear receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 276(42), 
38341–38344 (2001).

54.  Greer EL, Oskoui PR, Banko MR et al.: 

The energy sensor AMP-activated protein 
kinase directly regulates the mammalian 
FOXO3 transcription factor. J. Biol. Chem. 
282(41), 30107–30119 (2007).

55.  Liang J, Shao SH, Xu ZX et al.: The energy 

sensing LKB1–AMPK pathway regulates 
p27(kip1) phosphorylation mediating the 
decision to enter autophagy or apoptosis. 
Nat. Cell Biol. 9(2), 218–224 (2007).
56.  Short JD, Houston KD, Dere R et al.: 

AMP-activated protein kinase signaling results 
in cytoplasmic sequestration of p27. Cancer 
Res. 68(16), 6496–6506 (2008).

57.  Katz MS: Therapy insight: potential of statins 
for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. Nat. 
Clin. Pract. Oncol. 2(2), 82–89 (2005).

58.  Farwell WR, Scranton RE, Lawler EV et al.: 

The association between statins and cancer 
incidence in a veterans population. J. Natl 
Cancer Inst. 100(2), 134–139 (2008).

59.  Kuhajda FP: Fatty-acid synthase and human 
cancer: new perspectives on its role in tumor 
biology. Nutrition 16(3), 202–208 (2000).

60.  Baron A, Migita T, Tang D, Loda M: 

Fatty acid synthase: a metabolic oncogene in 
prostate cancer? J. Cell Biochem. 91(1), 47–53 
(2004).

61.  Zhou G, Myers R, Li Y et al.: Role of 

AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of 
metformin action. J. Clin. Invest. 108(8), 
1167–1174 (2001).

62.  Thupari JN, Pinn ML, Kuhajda FP: Fatty acid 

synthase inhibition in human breast cancer 
cells leads to malonyl-CoA-induced inhibition 
of fatty acid oxidation and cytotoxicity. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 285(2), 
217–223 (2001).

63.  De Schrijver E, Brusselmans K, Heyns W, 

Verhoeven G, Swinnen JV: RNA interference-
mediated silencing of the fatty acid synthase 
gene attenuates growth and induces 
morphological changes and apoptosis of 
LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res. 
63(13), 3799–3804 (2003).

64.  Zhou W, Han WF, Landree LE et al.: 
Fatty acid synthase inhibition activates 
AMP-activated protein kinase in SKOV3 
human ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res. 67(7), 
2964–2971 (2007).

Polyphenols stimulate AMP-activated protein 
kinase, lower lipids, and inhibit accelerated 
atherosclerosis in diabetic LDL receptor-
deficient mice. Diabetes 55(8), 2180–2191 
(2006).

66.  Bandyopadhyay GK, Yu JG, Ofrecio J, 

Olefsky JM: Increased malonyl-CoA levels in 
muscle from obese and Type 2 diabetic 
subjects lead to decreased fatty acid oxidation 
and increased lipogenesis; thiazolidinedione 
treatment reverses these defects. Diabetes 
55(8), 2277–2285 (2006).

67.  Sriwijitkamol A, Coletta DK, Wajcberg E 

et al.: Effect of acute exercise on AMPK 
signaling in skeletal muscle of subjects with 
Type 2 diabetes: a time-course and 
dose–response study. Diabetes 56(3), 
836–848 (2007).

68.  Kraegen EW, Saha AK, Preston E et al.: 

Increased malonyl-CoA and diacylglycerol 
content and reduced AMPK activity 
accompany insulin resistance induced by 
glucose infusion in muscle and liver of rats. 
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 290(3), 
E471–E479 (2006).

69.  Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker-Thurmond K, 
Thun MJ: Overweight, obesity, and mortality 
from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort 
of U.S. adults. N. Engl. J. Med. 348(17), 
1625–1638 (2003).

70.  LeRoith D, Novosyadlyy R, Gallagher EJ, 
Lann D, Vijayakumar A, Yakar S: Obesity 
and Type 2 diabetes are associated with an 
increased risk of developing cancer and a 
worse prognosis; epidemiological and 
mechanistic evidence. Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. 
Diabetes 116(Suppl. 1), S4–S6 (2008).
71.  Nawroth P: Diabetes, obesity, insulin 

resistance: different pathways to cancer? 
Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes 117(10), 
561–562 (2009).

72.  Percik R, Stumvoll M: Obesity and cancer. 

Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes 117(10), 
563–566 (2009).

73.  Yakar S, Nunez NP, Pennisi P et al.: Increased 

tumor growth in mice with diet-induced 
obesity: impact of ovarian hormones. 
Endocrinology 147(12), 5826–5834 (2006).

nn	 Demonstrates that high-fat-diet-induced 

obesity and insulin resistance are 
associated with increased susceptibility 
with carcinogenesis, suggesting a link 
between the metabolic syndrome 
and cancer.

74.  Nunez NP, Oh WJ, Rozenberg J et al.: 
Accelerated tumor formation in a fatless 
mouse with Type 2 diabetes and 
inflammation. Cancer Res. 66(10), 5469–5476 
(2006).

468

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3)

future science group

AMPK as a metabolic tumor suppressor: control of metabolism & cell growth Review

nn	 Also suggests a link between the 

84.  Jiang W, Zhu Z, Thompson HJ: 

93.  Esteve-Puig R, Canals F, Colome N, 

metabolic syndrome and Type 2 diabetes 
with increased incidence of tumors using 
a fatless mouse model.

75.  Fierz Y, Novosyadlyy R, Vijayakumar A, 

Yakar S, Leroith D: Insulin sensitizing 
therapy attenuates Type 2 diabetes-mediated 
mammary tumor progression. Diabetes 
DOI: 10.2337/db09-1291 (2009) 
(Epub ahead of print).

nn	 Further demonstrates the link between 

Type 2 diabetes and tumorigenesis.

76.  Kim CH, Pennisi P, Zhao H et al.: MKR 

mice are resistant to the metabolic actions of 
both insulin and adiponectin: discordance 
between insulin resistance and adiponectin 
responsiveness. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. 
Metab. 291(2), E298–E305 (2006).

77.  Evans JM, Donnelly LA, Emslie-Smith AM, 

Alessi DR, Morris AD: Metformin and 
reduced risk of cancer in diabetic patients. 
BMJ 330(7503), 1304–1305 (2005).

nn	 First report to indicate that patients 

using metformin have reduced risk of 
cancer, which supports in vitro studies 
and stimulates further clinical 
investigations using metfomin as an 
adjuvant for cancer therapy.

78.  Libby G, Donnelly LA, Donnan PT, 

Alessi DR, Morris AD, Evans JM: 
New users of metformin are at low risk of 
incident cancer: a cohort study among 
people with Type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 
32(9), 1620–1625 (2009).

79.  Bowker SL, Majumdar SR, Veugelers P, 

Johnson JA: Increased cancer-related 
mortality for patients with Type 2 diabetes 
who use sulfonylureas or insulin: response 
to Farooki and Schneider. Diabetes Care 
29(8), 1990–1991 (2006).

80.  Barb D, Williams CJ, Neuwirth AK, 

Mantzoros CS: Adiponectin in relation to 
malignancies: a review of existing basic 
research and clinical evidence. Am. J. Clin. 
Nutr. 86(3), S858–S866 (2007).

81.  Grossmann ME, Nkhata KJ, Mizuno NK, 
Ray A, Cleary MP: Effects of adiponectin 
on breast cancer cell growth and signaling. 
Br. J. Cancer 98(2), 370–379 (2008).

82.  Kim KY, Baek A, Hwang JE et al.: 

Adiponectin-activated AMPK stimulates 
dephosphorylation of AKT through protein 
phosphatase 2A activation. Cancer Res. 
69(9), 4018–4026 (2009).

n	

83.  Sugiyama M, Takahashi H, Hosono K et al.: 

Adiponectin inhibits colorectal cancer cell 
growth through the AMPK/mTOR 
pathway. Int. J. Oncol. 34(2), 339–344 
(2009).

Merlino G, Recio JA: Uncoupling of the 
LKB1–AMPKa energy sensor pathway by 
growth factors and oncogenic BRAF. PLoS 
One 4(3), E4771 (2009).

Shows that oncogenic activation of 
ERK/RSK can lead to the inhibition of 
LKB1. The study suggests that 
LKB1/AMPK might be inactivated by 
oncogenes in addition to loss-of-function 
mutations of LKB1, which warrants further 
investigation into whether LKB1/AMPK is 
suppressed in cancers containing oncogenic 
mutations of ras and BRAF.

94.  Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C et al.: 

Mutations of the BRAF gene in human 
cancer. Nature 417(6892), 949–954 (2002).

95.  Bos JL: ras oncogenes in human cancer: 
a review. Cancer Res. 49(17), 4682–4689 
(1989).

96.  Costanzo-Garvey DL, Pfluger PT, 

n	

Dougherty MK et al.: KSR2 is an essential 
regulator of AMP kinase, energy expenditure, 
and insulin sensitivity. Cell Metab. 10(5), 
366–378 (2009).

Shows that KSR2, a well-known scaffold 
for the Raf/MEK pathway, associates with 
AMPK. Knocking out KSR2 induces 
obesity and insulin resistance and hampers 
AMPK activation. Thus, it suggests that 
KSR and AMPK might be control points 
for mitogenesis and energy homeostasis.

97.  Kortum RL, Lewis RE: The molecular 

scaffold KSR1 regulates the proliferative and 
oncogenic potential of cells. Mol. Cell Biol. 
24(10), 4407–4416 (2004).

98.  Dougherty MK, Ritt DA, Zhou M et al.: 

KSR2 is a calcineurin substrate that promotes 
ERK cascade activation in response to 
calcium signals. Mol. Cell 34(6), 652–662 
(2009).

99.  Claperon A, Therrien M: KSR and CNK: 

two scaffolds regulating RAS-mediated RAF 
activation. Oncogene 26(22), 3143–3158 
(2007).

100.  Warburg O: On respiratory impairment in 

cancer cells. Science 124(3215), 269–270 
(1956).

101.  Kroemer G, Pouyssegur J: Tumor cell 

metabolism: cancer’s Achilles’ heel. 
Cancer Cell 13(6), 472–482 (2008).

102.  Gogvadze V, Orrenius S, Zhivotovsky B: 
Mitochondria in cancer cells: what is so 
special about them? Trends Cell Biol. 18(4), 
165–173 (2008).

103.  Kaelin WG Jr, Ratcliffe PJ: Oxygen sensing 

by metazoans: the central role of the HIF 
hydroxylase pathway. Mol. Cell 30(4), 
393–402 (2008).

Dietary energy restriction modulates the 
activity of AMP-activated protein kinase, Akt, 
and mammalian target of rapamycin in 
mammary carcinomas, mammary gland, and 
liver. Cancer Res. 68(13), 5492–5499 (2008).

n	

85.  Rattan R, Giri S, Singh AK, Singh I: 

5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-b-D-
ribofuranoside inhibits cancer cell 
proliferation in vitro and in vivo via 
AMP-activated protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 
280(47), 39582–39593 (2005).

86.  Dowling RJ, Zakikhani M, Fantus IG, 

Pollak M, Sonenberg N: Metformin inhibits 
mammalian target of rapamycin-dependent 
translation initiation in breast cancer cells. 
Cancer Res. 67(22), 10804–10812 (2007).
87.  Buzzai M, Jones RG, Amaravadi RK et al.: 

Systemic treatment with the antidiabetic drug 
metformin selectively impairs p53-deficient 
tumor cell growth. Cancer Res. 67(14), 
6745–6752 (2007).

n	

Suggests that genetic context may 
determine the response of tumor to 
AMPK activators.

88.  Horman S, Vertommen D, Heath R et al.: 

Insulin antagonizes ischemia-induced Thr172 
phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein 
kinase a-subunits in heart via hierarchical 
phosphorylation of Ser485/491. J. Biol. Chem. 
281(9), 5335–5340 (2006).

89.  Hallstrom TC, Mori S, Nevins JR: An E2F1-

dependent gene expression program that 
determines the balance between proliferation 
and cell death. Cancer Cell 13(1), 11–22 
(2008).

90.  Hadad SM, Baker L, Quinlan PR et al.: 

Histological evaluation of AMPK signalling 
in primary breast cancer. BMC Cancer 9, 307 
(2009).

91.  Conde E, Suarez-Gauthier A, 

Garcia-Garcia E et al.: Specific pattern of 
LKB1 and phospho-acetyl-CoA carboxylase 
protein immunostaining in human normal 
tissues and lung carcinomas. Hum. Pathol. 
38(9), 1351–1360 (2007).

92.  Zheng B, Jeong JH, Asara JM et al.: 

Oncogenic B-RAF negatively regulates the 
tumor suppressor LKB1 to promote 
melanoma cell proliferation. Mol. Cell 33(2), 
237–247 (2009).

Shows that oncogenic activation of 
ERK/RSK can lead to the inhibition of 
LKB1. The study suggests that 
LKB1/AMPK might be inactivated by 
oncogenes in addition to loss-of-function 
mutations of LKB1, which warrants further 
investigation into whether LKB1/AMPK is 
suppressed in cancers containing oncogenic 
mutations of ras and BRAF.

future science group

www.futuremedicine.com

469

Review Luo, Zang & Guo

104.  Pelicano H, Martin DS, Xu RH, Huang P: 

114.  Lamontagne J, Pepin E, Peyot ML et al.: 

121.  Kim HS, Hwang JT, Yun H et al.: Inhibition 

Glycolysis inhibition for anticancer 
treatment. Oncogene 25(34), 4633–4646 
(2006).

105.  Shaw RJ: Glucose metabolism and cancer. 

Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 18(6), 598–608 
(2006).

106.  Marsin AS, Bouzin C, Bertrand L, Hue L: 
The stimulation of glycolysis by hypoxia in 
activated monocytes is mediated by 
AMP-activated protein kinase and inducible 
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 
277(34), 30778–30783 (2002).

107.  Hwang JT, Lee M, Jung SN et al.: 

AMP-activated protein kinase activity is 
required for vanadate-induced hypoxia-
inducible factor 1a expression in DU145 
cells. Carcinogenesis 25(12), 2497–2507 
(2004).

108.  Lee M, Hwang JT, Yun H et al.: 

Critical roles of AMP-activated protein 
kinase in the carcinogenic metal-induced 
expression of VEGF and HIF-1 proteins in 
DU145 prostate carcinoma. Biochem. 
Pharmacol. 72(1), 91–103 (2006).

109.  Bensaad K, Vousden KH: p53: new roles in 

metabolism. Trends Cell Biol. 17(6), 
286–291 (2007).

110.  Matoba S, Kang JG, Patino WD et al.: 

p53 regulates mitochondrial respiration. 
Science 312(5780), 1650–1653 (2006).

111.  Green DR, Chipuk JE: p53 and metabolism: 

Inside the TIGAR. Cell 126(1), 30–32 
(2006).

112.  Kondoh H, Lleonart ME, Gil J et al.: 

Glycolytic enzymes can modulate cellular 
life span. Cancer Res. 65(1), 177–185 (2005).
113.  Richter EA, Ruderman NB: AMPK and the 

biochemistry of exercise: implications for 
human health and disease. Biochem. J. 
418(2), 261–275 (2009).

Pioglitazone acutely reduces insulin 
secretion and causes metabolic deceleration 
of the pancreatic b-cell at submaximal 
glucose concentrations. Endocrinology 
150(8), 3465–3474 (2009).

115.  De Leo V, La Marca A, Orvieto R, 

Morgante G: Effect of metformin on 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I and 
IGF-binding protein I in polycystic ovary 
syndrome. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 85(4), 
1598–1600 (2000).

116.  Tsuboi T, da Silva Xavier G, Leclerc I, 

Rutter GA: 5´-AMP-activated protein kinase 
controls insulin-containing secretory vesicle 
dynamics. J. Biol. Chem. 278(52), 
52042–52051 (2003).

117.  Rutter GA, Da Silva Xavier G, Leclerc I: 
Roles of 5´-AMP-activated protein kinase 
(AMPK) in mammalian glucose 
homoeostasis. Biochem. J. 375(Pt 1), 1–16 
(2003).

118.  da Silva Xavier G, Leclerc I, Varadi A, 

Tsuboi T, Moule SK, Rutter GA: Role for 
AMP-activated protein kinase in 
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and 
preproinsulin gene expression. Biochem. J. 
371(Pt 3), 761–774 (2003).

119.  Jiralerspong S, Palla SL, Giordano SH et al.: 

Metformin and pathologic complete 
responses to neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
in diabetic patients with breast cancer. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 27(20), 3297–3302 (2009).

n	 First clinical study to assess the 

response of breast cancer to 
chemotherapy in diabetic patients 
receiving metformin, showing some 
positive results.

120.  Goodwin PJ, Ligibel JA, Stambolic V: 

Metformin in breast cancer: time for action. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 27(20), 3271–3273 (2009).

of AMP-activated protein kinase sensitizes 
cancer cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis via 
hyper-induction of p53. J. Biol. Chem. 283(7), 
3731–3742 (2008).

122.  Okoshi R, Ozaki T, Yamamoto H et al.: 

Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase 
induces p53-dependent apoptotic cell death in 
response to energetic stress. J. Biol. Chem. 
283(7), 3979–3987 (2008).

123.  Viollet B, Athea Y, Mounier R et al.: AMPK: 

Lessons from transgenic and knockout 
animals. Front. Biosci. 14, 19–44 (2009).
124.  Suzuki A, Lu J, Kusakai G, Kishimoto A, 

Ogura T, Esumi H: ARK5 is a tumor 
invasion-associated factor downstream of Akt 
signaling. Mol. Cell Biol. 24(8), 3526–3535 
(2004).

Affiliations
n	 Zhijun Luo, MD, PhD 

Department of Biochemistry, Boston 
University School of Medicine, 715 Albany 
Street, Evans 645, Boston, MA 02118, USA 
Tel.: +1 617 414 1033 
Fax: +1 617 414 1646  
zluo@bu.edu

n	 Mengwei Zang, MD, PhD 

Department of Medicine, Boston 
University School of Medicine, 650 Albany 
Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA 
Tel.: +1 617 638 2799 
Fax: +1 617 638 7113 
mwzang1@bu.edu

n	 Wen Guo, PhD 

Department of Medicine, Boston 
University School of Medicine, 670 Albany 
Street #211, Boston, MA 02118, USA 
Tel.: +1 617 638 8279 
Fax: +1 617 638 8217 
wguo@bu.edu

470

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3)

future science group

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2509

Polymorphisms in the Reduced Folate Carrier, Thymidylate
Synthase, or Methionine Synthase and Risk of Colon Cancer

Cornelia M. Ulrich,1 Karen Curtin,2 John D. Potter,1 and Jeannette Bigler1
Bette Caan3 Martha L. Slattery2

1Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington; 2University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah;
and 3Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program, Division of Research, Oakland, California

Abstract

Folate metabolism supports the synthesis of nucleotides as
well as the transfer of methyl groups. Polymorphisms
in folate-metabolizing enzymes have been shown to affect
risk of colorectal neoplasia and other malignancies. Using
data from a population-based incident case-control study
(1,600 cases and 1,962 controls), we investigated associations
between genetic variants in the reduced folate carrier (RFC),
thymidylate synthase (TS), methionine synthase (MTR),
and 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and
colon cancer risk. The TS enhancer region (TSER) variant
was associated with a reduced risk among men [2rpt/2rpt
versus 3rpt/3rpt wild-type; odds ratio (OR), 0.7; 95%
confidence interval, 0.6-0.98] but not women. When com-
bined genotypes for both TS polymorphisms (TSER and
3V-untranslated region 1494delTTAAAG) were evaluated,
ORs for variant genotypes were generally below 1.0, with
statistically significantly reduced risks among women.

Neither MTR D919G nor RFC 80G>A polymorphisms were
associated with altered colon cancer risk. Because folate
metabolism is characterized by interrelated reactions, we
evaluated gene-gene interactions. Genotypes resulting in
reduced MTHFR activity in conjunction with low TS
expression were associated with a reduced risk of colon
cancer. When dietary intakes were taken into account,
individuals with at least one variant TSER allele (3rpt/2rpt
or 2rpt/2rpt) were at reduced risk in the presence of a low
folate intake. This study supports findings from adenoma
studies indicating that purine synthesis may be a relevant
biological mechanism linking folate metabolism to colon
cancer risk. A pathway-based approach to data analysis is
needed to help discern the independent and combined
effects of dietary intakes and genetic variability in folate
(Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;
metabolism.
14(11):2509 – 16)

Introduction

Folate is an essential micronutrient in humans, the primary
function of which is as a carrier of single-carbon units. Folate-
dependent reactions include the biosynthesis of thymidylate,
purines, methionine, and glycine thus linking it to nucleotide
synthesis as well as the provision of methyl groups (1).
High dietary folate intakes, or biomarkers thereof, have
been associated with a reduced risk of colon cancer or its pre-
cursors in most, although not all, studies (2-5). Several studies
showing associations with genetic polymorphisms in folate-
metabolizing enzymes lend support to a causal relationship
between folate and colorectal carcinogenesis (6-10). Biological
mechanisms linking folate to colorectal carcinogenesis include
an altered provision of S-adenosylmethionine for methylation
reactions, including DNA methylation, and changes in the
availability of nucleotides, such as thymidylate, for DNA
synthesis and repair (11, 12).

We have previously reported on associations between
polymorphisms in 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase
(MTHFR) and risk of colon cancer (13). Here, we extend this
work to common genetic variants in thymidylate synthase
(TS), the reduced folate carrier (RFC), and methionine synthase
(MTR) in relation to colon cancer risk. TS is a key enzyme in
folate metabolism that catalyzes the conversion of dUMP to
dTMP for the provision of thymidine, a rate-limiting nucleo-

Received 4/14/05; revised 8/10/05; accepted 9/8/05.
Grant support: NIH grants R01 CA48998 and R01 CA59045.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges.
This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C.
Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Note: C.M. Ulrich and K. Curtin contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Cornelia M. Ulrich, Cancer Prevention Program, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, M4-B402 Seattle, WA 98109-1024.
Phone: 206-667-7617; Fax: 206-667-7850. E-mail: nulrich@fhcrc.org.
Copyright D 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0261

tide essential for DNA synthesis and repair (see Fig. 1). TS is
also a primary target for major chemotherapeutic agents,
including 5-fluorouracil. We investigated the role of a poly-
morphism in the 5V-untranslated region (5V-UTR) enhancer
region (three or two repeats of a 28-bp sequence), resulting in
reduced TS expression among those with fewer repeats (14)
and a 6-bp insertion or deletion (1,494 bp in the 3V-UTR) that
affects mRNA stability (15, 16).

RFC is responsible for the active transport of 5-methyl-
tetrahydrofolate from plasma to cytosol. A polymorphism in
the RFC gene (80G>A, Arg27His) seems associated with a
higher affinity for folate (17). Among 169 healthy individuals
who were stratified by MTHFR 677C>T genotype, the variant
A allele was consistently and linearly associated with higher
plasma folate concentrations (17). Furthermore, concentrations
of methotrexate 24 to 48 hours after administration were
higher among children with acute leukemia homozygous for
the variant A allele, providing additional support for differ-
ential carrier activity among those with variant genotypes (18).
MTR catalyzes the methylation of homocysteine to methi-
onine with simultaneous conversion of 5-methyl-tetrahydro-
folate to tetrahydrofolate (Fig. 1). A variant in the MTR gene
(2756A>G, Asp919Gly; ref. 19) may affect plasma homocysteine
concentrations. Some studies (20, 21) but not others (22-24)
have found that homocysteine concentrations tend to decrease
linearly across genotypes, with the AA genotype associated
with the highest homocysteine concentrations. Studies on
colorectal neoplasia have been inconsistent: the GG genotype
has been associated with a somewhat reduced risk of colo-
rectal cancer (22, 25) yet a possible increased risk of colorectal
adenoma (26).

In this large population-based case-control study of colon
cancer, we sought to evaluate the role of these polymorphisms
in defining colon cancer risk, either alone or in interaction with
specific nutrient intakes and other genotypes. Furthermore, as

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

2510

Polymorphisms and Colon Cancer Risk

Figure 1. Simplified version of folate-mediated one-carbon metabolism, highlighting proteins with polymorphisms investigated in this study
(figure modified from ref. 36). Key enzymes are denoted as ovals, substrates as rectangles. THF, tetrahydrofolate; DHF, dihydrofolate; DHFR,
dihydrofolate reductase; SAM, S-adenosylmethionine; SAH, S-adenosylhomocysteine; dUMP, deoxyuridine monophosphate; dTMP,
deoxythymidine monophosphate; X, a variety of substrates for methylation; RFC, reduced folate carrier; hFR, human folate receeptor;
MTHFR, 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; GART, phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase; AICARFT, 5-aminomidazole-4-
carboxamide ribonucleotide; 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil.

some of the associations of folate metabolism may differ by
estrogen exposure (13), possibly because of mechanisms
attributable to hypermethylation of
the estrogen receptor
(27), we evaluated interactions with postmenopausal hormone
(PMH) use.

Materials and Methods

Participants were African American, Caucasian, or Hispanic
subjects from the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program of
Northern California, an eight-county area in Utah, and the
metropolitan Twin Cities area of Minnesota. Eligibility criteria
for cases included diagnosis with first-primary incident colon
cancer (International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, 2nd
edition codes 18.0, 18.2-18.9) between October 1, 1991 and
September 30, 1994; between 30 and 79 years of age at time of
diagnosis; and mentally competent to complete the interview.
Proximal tumors were defined as cecum through transverse
colon; tumors in the splenic flexure and descending and
sigmoid colon were categorized as distal. Cases with
adenocarcinoma or carcinoma of the rectosigmoid junction
or rectum (defined as the first 15 cm from the anal opening)
or with known familial adenomatous polyposis, ulcerative
colitis, or Crohn’s disease were not eligible. Of all cases
identified, 65% of those contacted consented to participate in
the study. Controls who had never had a previous colorectal
tumor were randomly selected in proportion to the cases
within the geographically defined areas from Kaiser Perma-
nente Medical Care Program membership lists in California;
driver’s license lists, random digit dialing, or Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services lists, formerly known as the
Health Care Finance Administration, for Utah; and driver’s

license or state identification lists in Minnesota. Controls were
frequency matched to cases by sex and 5-year age group.
These methods have been described in detail (28). Of all
controls selected, 64% participated.

Data Collection. Trained interviewers collected diet and
lifestyle data in person using laptop computers. Study quality
control methods have been described (29, 30). The reference
period for the study was the calendar year f2 years before
date of diagnosis (cases) or date of selection (controls). Dietary
intake data were ascertained using an adaptation of the valid-
ated Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults
diet history questionnaire (31). Participants were asked to
determine which foods were eaten and the frequency with
which foods were eaten. Nutrients were calculated using the
Minnesota Nutrition Coordinating Center’s nutrient database,
version 19.

TS, MTR, and RFC genotyping. Of 4,403 cases and controls
with valid study data, 3,680 (84%) had blood collected
primarily during the in-person interview, or during a clinical
visit (83% of cases and 85% of controls). Genomic DNA was
extracted using methods described in (refs. 14, 32). All samples
were genotyped for two polymorphisms in the TS gene (TSER,
3V-UTR 1494delTTAAAG), MTR D919G, and RFC 80G>A.
A total of 3,562 (97% of cases and 97% of controls with blood
collected) had genotype information for both TSER and 3V-UTR
1494delTTAAAG. 5V-Nuclease assays that had been previously
used to genotype other polymorphisms in the folate pathway
(MTHFR 677C>T, MTHFR 1298A>C, and MTR D919G) have
been described (13, 26).

Both TS polymorphisms were analyzed using fluorescent
the TSER 28-bp
size discrimination. For the analysis of
repeat polymorphism, a fragment containing the repeats was

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

amplified using the following primers: forward primer, 5V-
6FAM-GTGGCTCCTGCGTTTCCCCC-3V; reverse primer, 5V-
GGCTCCGAGCCGGCCACAGGCATGGCGCGG-3V(14). The
PCR reactions contained 1 GeneAmp buffer (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA), 1.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 200 Amol/
L deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates, 100 nmol/L each primer,
10% DMSO, 1 unit AmpliTaq DNA polymerase (Applied
Biosystems), and 100 ng of genomic DNA. Cycling conditions
were one cycle of 94jC for 2 minutes; 35 cycles of 94jC for
30 seconds, 63jC for 30 seconds, and 72jC for 30 seconds; and
a final extension at 72jC for 5 minutes. The amplified
fragments were analyzed on an ABI 3100 genetic analyzer.
A fragment containing the 3V-UTR deletion was amplified
forward primer, 5V-6FAM-
using the following primers:
CAAATCTGAGGGAGCTGAGT-3V; reverse primer, 5V-CAGA-
TAAGTGGCAGTACAGA-3V. The PCR reactions contained 1
GeneAmp buffer, 2 mmol/L MgCl2, 150 Amol/L deoxynucleo-
tide triphosphates, 300 nmol/L each primer, 1 unit AmpliTaq
DNA polymerase, and 50 ng genomic DNA. Cycling con-
ditions were one cycle of 94jC for 5 minutes; 30 cycles of 94jC
for 30 seconds, 60jC for 45 seconds, and 72jC for 60 seconds;
and a final extension at 72jC for 10 minutes. The amplified
fragments were analyzed on an ABI 3100 genetic analyzer. For
both TS polymorphisms, the correlation between fragment size
and repeat number was confirmed by sequencing.

The 80G>A polymorphism in RFC was detected by allelic
discrimination using the 5V nuclease assay on a 7900HT
sequence detection system (ABI). The 5V-nuclease genotyping
assay was validated by genotyping 100 individuals by both
5V-nuclease assay and RFLP. There were no discrepancies
between the two assays. Genotyping of the 80G>A polymor-
phism was done in 20-AL reactions containing 1 Taqman
PCR core reagents (ABI), 3 mmol/L MgCl2, 200 nmol/L
each PCR primer (forward primer, 5V-AGCCCAGCGGTGGA-
GAAG-3Vand reverse primer, 5V-AGCCGTAGAAGCAAAGG-
TAGCA-3V), 150 nmol/L MGB probe 5V-VIC-TCCTGGC-
GGCGCC-3V (Applied Biosystems; G allele), 100 nmol/L
MGB probe 5V-6-FAM-TGGCGGCACCTCG-3V (A allele), 0.5
unit AmpliTaq Gold, 0.2 unit AmpErase UNG, and 5 ng
genomic DNA. The amplification cycles were 50jC for
5 minutes, 95jC for 10 minutes, and 40 cycles of 95jC for
15 seconds and 60jC for 1 minute. Positive controls for all the
genotypes as well as four negative controls were included in
each plate. For quality control of all the polymorphisms,
genotyping for 94 randomly selected samples was repeated.
There were no discrepancies.

Statistical Methods. Logistic regression models were used
to estimate associations in various ways. We stratified the data
by sex and estimated the risk of colon cancer given a certain
TS, MTR, or RFC genotype and examined risk estimates
further stratified by other population characteristics (e.g.,
tumor site and age). The combined effects of TSER and 3V-
UTR 1494delTTAAAG were calculated using individuals who
were homozygous for the common allele at both loci as the
reference group. We assessed the joint interaction between
genotype and level of nutrient intake by using those with low
nutrient intake and homozygous for the most common (wild
type) allele for TSER, 3V-UTR, MTR, or RFC as a common
reference point. We also assessed gene-gene interactions in the
folate pathway using the homozygous genotype for the most
common allele as the reference. Similarly,
the interaction
between genotype and recent estrogen status in postmeno-
pausal women was assessed using as the reference group no
PMH use and wild-type TS, MTR, or RFC genotype.

Maximum likelihood estimates of population TS haplotype
frequencies from unphased genotype data were obtained from
an expectation maximization algorithm, assuming Hardy-
Weinberg equilibrium, according to Excoffier and Slatkin (33)
using SAS/Genetics software, 2002 (SAS/Genetics, Cary, NC).

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

2511

Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI)
were calculated from unconditional logistic regression models.
In these models, age at diagnosis or selection, body mass index
reported for the reference period (kg/m2), long-term vigorous
leisure time physical activity, total energy intake, dietary fiber,
dietary calcium, and number of cigarettes smoked per day on a
regular basis were included as covariates to adjust for potential
confounding. Haplotype-specific relative risks were assessed
according to methods described in Stram et al. (34) using
logistic regression software (SAS, release 8.2).

Separate analyses were done for men and women to
determine whether differences existed by sex, as most of the
literature has focused on either men or women. Assessment of
interactions among genotypes, diet, and the risk of colon
cancer were based on departure from additive risks using the
relative risk due to interaction formulation of Hosmer and
Lemeshow extended to more than two allelic combinations
and/or environmental exposures (35). Interaction using a
multiplicative scale was also examined. Interactions between

Table 1. Characteristics of the study population (n = 3,562)

Tumor site, n (%)

Proximal
Distal
Unknown

Age at diagnosis or

selection (range, 30-79), y

c

Cases
(n = 1,600)

Controls
(n = 1,962)

P *

791 (49)
771 (48)
38 (3)
64.9 F 9.8

65.0 F 10.2

0.86

Sex, n (%)

Men
Women

Race/ethnicity, n (%)
Non-Hispanic White
Other

Recent PMH use,

b

, n (%)

postmenopausal women
No
Yes

c

Kilocalories

Men
Women

TSER genotype, n (%)

3/3 repeats
3/2 repeats
2/2 repeats

x
Frequency, 2 repeat allele
TS 3’UTR 1494delTTAAAG

genotype, n (%)
ins/ins
ins/del
del/del

x
Frequency, del allele
MTR D919G genotype, n (%)

DD
DG
GG

x
Frequency, G allele
RFC 80G>A genotype, n (%)

GG
GA
AA

Frequency, A allele
TS haplotype, estimated

{

k
(expected)
,
3 repeat/ins
3 repeat/del
2 repeat/ins
2 repeat/del

897 (56)
703 (44)

1,462 (91)
138 (9)

1,036 (53)
926 (47)

1,825 (93)
137 (7)

467 (77)
143 (23)

549 (69)
242 (31)

2,773 F 1,217
2,046 F 874

2,638 F 1,162
1,974 F 832

488 (30)
764 (48)
348 (22)

0.46

720 (45)
690 (43)
190 (12)

0.32

1,015 (63)
529 (33)
56 (4)

0.20

513 (32)
788 (49)
299 (19)

0.43

542 (28)
983 (50)
437 (22)

0.48

881 (45)
866 (44)
215 (11)

0.32

1,264 (64)
608 (31)
90 (5)

0.20

585 (30)
976 (50)
401 (20)

0.45

0.30 (0.36)
0.24 (0.17)
0.38 (0.31)
0.08 (0.15)

0.28 (0.35)
0.24 (0.17)
0.40 (0.33)
0.08 (0.15)

0.05

0.05

<0.01

0.01
0.09

0.16
0.15

0.65
0.77

0.15
0.97

0.24
0.10

0.56

m2 or t test.

*Based on
cMean F SD.
bPostmenopausal hormone use within 2 years of diagnosis/selection.
xAllele frequencies are reported for non-Hispanic Whites.
kMaximum likelihood estimate (expected assuming linkage equilibrium).
{P < 0.01 (

m2 test of linkage disequilibrium for cases or controls, separately).

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

2512

Polymorphisms and Colon Cancer Risk

genotypes and PMH use in postmenopausal women were
m2 test of the difference between slopes
assessed using a Wald
from the (assumed linear) change in ORs, keeping the wild-
type TS genotype constant across the varying genotypes for
the respective other TS polymorphism.

Results

Selected characteristics of the study population and MTHFR
genotype frequencies by case or control status are presented in
Table 1. The study participants were predominantly self-
identified as non-Hispanic Caucasian (92%), with the remain-
der Hispanic (4%) and African American (4%). All genotypes
were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (assessed separately for
cases and controls), and allele frequencies were consistent with
previous reports (36). The TS polymorphisms were in linkage
disequilibrium (DV= 0.46 among non-Hispanic Caucasians).

Table 2 describes the main associations seen with the poly-
morphisms, stratified by gender. Among men, TSER variant
genotypes were associated with a significantly decreased risk
(3rpt/2rpt: OR, 0.8; 95% CI, 0.6-0.98; 2rpt/2rpt: OR, 0.7; 95%
CI, 0.6-0.98). No such risk reduction was observed among
women. When combined genotypes (or diplotypes) for both
TS polymorphisms were considered, almost all of the ORs for
variant genotypes among both men and women were below
1.0, with statistically significantly reduced risks for women.
Risk estimates for TS haplotypes, including variant alleles,
compared with wild-type haplotype were not significantly
different from 1.0 (data not shown).

Neither the MTR D919G nor RFC 80G>A polymorphism
was associated with altered colon cancer risk among men or
women (Table 2).

Folate metabolism involves circulation of folate metabolites
through multiple cycles, as well as feedback mechanisms
between these cycles (Fig. 1). Therefore, we evaluated gene-
gene interactions between the polymorphisms investigated
here, as well as those we have reported on previously (8, 13).
ORs different from 1.0 were seen largely for stratifications of
TS, RFC, or MTR by MTHFR 677C>T or 1298A>C genotypes,

and these are presented in Table 3. Among men, reduced
risks associated with variant TS genotypes (e.g., the presence
of TSER 2rpt/2rpt or TS 3V-UTR deletion) were most
pronounced for those with MTHFR TT genotypes. The
MTHFR 1298CC genotype was associated with a decreased
risk among women; however,
this risk reduction seemed
independent of TS genotypes. There was no evidence for
interactions between MTR D919G or RFC 80G>A and
MTHFR genotypes.

We also investigated whether risk estimates associated
with polymorphisms in these folate-metabolizing enzymes
differed by dietary intakes of folate, methionine, alcohol, or
vitamins B6, B2, or B12. Consistent with our previous report
on colorectal adenoma (37) among men, the TSER variant
conferred a reduced risk in the presence of low folate intake
(lowest tertile < 318 Ag/d; TS 2rpt/2rpt or 2rpt/3rpt: OR,
0.7; 95% CI, 0.5-0.9 compared with wild-type 3rpt/3rpt). A
similar risk reduction with the TSER variant genotypes
was observed among men with low methionine intakes (<2.0
g/d): TS 2rpt/2rpt or 2rpt/3rpt (OR, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.4-0.9)
compared with wild-type 3rpt/3rpt. However, none of these
patterns was observed among women for the TS genotypes
nor for TS haplotypes in either sex. There were no clear
patterns or associations following stratification by vitamin B6
or B12 intake. No meaningful differences in risk were
observed for MTR genotypes when stratified by nutrient
intakes.

Among women in the lowest tertile of folate intake (V273
Ag/d), the RFC variant genotypes were associated with a
decreased risk (wild-type GG: OR, 1.0; GA or AA: OR, 0.7; 95%
CI, 0.5-1.0). Among women, we observed a significant gene-
nutrient interaction in that only those with the GG genotype
benefited from a diet higher in folate, whereas no difference in
risk with variable folate intake was seen among those with the
combined GA or AA genotypes (P interaction = 0.04, multiplica-
tive scale; P = 0.01, additive scale). This pattern was not seen
among men.

Because of the observed differences in risk patterns among
men and women and our past findings regarding an inter-
action between postmenopausal hormone use (PMH use) and

Table 2. Association between TS, MTR, and RFC genotypes and colon cancer

Men

Women

Genotype

TSER

Cases (n)

Controls (n)

OR (95% CI)

Cases (n)

Controls (n)

OR (95%CI)

3rpt/3rpt
3rpt/2rpt
2rpt/2rpt

TS 3V-UTR 1494delTTAAAG

295
421
173

ins/ins
ins/del
del/del

387
392
110
Combined TSER and TS 3V-UTR
3rpt/3rpt
ins/ins
ins/del or del/del

77
218

3rpt/2rpt or 2rpt/2rpt

ins/ins
ins/del or del/del

MTR D919G

DD
DG
GG

RFC 80G>A*

GG
GA
AA

310
284

555
308
30

301
425
167

283
519
231

468
465
100

82
201

386
364

668
319
54

317
511
211

1.0 (reference)
0.8 (0.6 to <1.0)
0.7 (0.6 to <1.0)

1.0 (reference)
1.0 (0.8-1.2)
1.2 (0.9-1.7)

1.0 (reference)
1.2 (0.8-1.7)

0.9 (0.6-1.2)
0.8 (0.6-1.2)

1.0 (reference)
1.1 (0.9-1.4)
0.7 (0.4-1.1)

1.0 (reference)
0.8 (0.7-1.0)
0.8 (0.6-1.1)

190
337
171

328
293
77

71
119

257
251

458
220
25

210
361
132

254
462
205

409
398
114

61
193

348
319

600
288
37

267
468
190

1.0 (reference)
0.9 (0.7-1.2)
1.1 (0.8-1.5)

1.0 (reference)
0.9 (0.7-1.1)
0.8 (0.6-1.2)

1.0 (reference)
0.5 (0.3-0.8)

0.6 (0.4-0.9)
0.7 (0.5 to <1.0)

1.0 (reference)
1.0 (0.8-1.3)
0.9 (0.5-1.5)

1.0 (reference)
1.0 (0.8-1.2)
0.9 (0.6-1.1)

NOTE: Adjusted for age, body mass index, lifetime vigorous leisure activity, energy intake, dietary fiber, dietary calcium, usual number of cigarettes smoked, and
other TS polymorphism where appropriate (TSER, TS 3V-UTR).
*Men and women combined: GG, OR = 1.0 (reference); GA, OR = 0.9 (95% CI, 0.8-1.0); AA, OR = 0.8 (95% CI, 0.7-1.0).

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

Table 3. Association between polymorphisms in the folate pathway and colon cancer

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

2513

Genotype

TSER

3rpt/3rpt

3/2rpt or 2/2rpt

3rpt/3rpt

3/2 or 2/2rpt

TS 3V-UTR
ins/ins

Any deletion

ins/ins

Any deletion

MTR D919G

DD

DG or GG

DD

DG or GG

RFC 80G>A

GG

GA or AA

GG

GA or AA

Men

Women

Cases (n)

Controls (n)

OR (95% CI)

Cases (n)

Controls (n)

OR (95% CI)

MTHFR 677C>T
CC or CT
TT
CC or CT
TT
MTHFR 1298A>C
AA or AC
CC
AA or AC
CC
MTHFR 677C>T
CC or CT
TT
CC or CT
TT
MTHFR 1298A>C
AA or AC
CC
AA or AC
CC
MTHFR 677C>T
CC or CT
TT
CC or CT
TT
MTHFR 1298A>C
AA or AC
CC
AA or AC
CC
MTHFR 677C>T
CC or CT
TT
CC or CT
TT
MTHFR 1298A>C
AA or AC
CC
AA or AC
CC

266
28
544
50

261
34
535
59

347
40
463
38

346
41
450
52

507
47
307
31

495
60
304
34

274
27
540
51

267
34
532
60

242
41
668
81

254
29
676
74

418
49
492
73

420
48
510
55

583
83
333
40

597
70
340
33

279
38
636
85

283
34
653
69

1.0 (reference)
0.6 (0.4-1.0)
0.7 (0.6-0.9)
0.6 (0.4-0.9)

1.0 (reference)
1.2 (0.7-2.0)
0.8 (0.6 to <1.0)
0.8 (0.5-1.1)

1.0 (reference)
1.0 (0.6-1.6)
1.1 (0.9-1.3)
0.6 (0.4-0.9)

1.0 (reference)
1.0 (0.6-1.5)
1.0 (0.8-1.2)
1.1 (0.7-1.7)

1.0 (reference)
0.7 (0.5 to <1.0)
1.0 (0.9-1.3)
0.9 (0.6-1.5)

1.0 (reference)
1.0 (0.7-1.5)
1.1 (0.9-1.3)
1.2 (0.7-2.0)

1.0 (reference)
0.7 (0.4-1.1)
0.8 (0.7-1.0)
0.6 (0.4-0.9)

1.0 (reference)
1.1 (0.7-1.9)
0.8 (0.7 to >1.0)
0.9 (0.6-1.3)

172
18
456
52

175
15
463
45

297
31
331
39

298
30
340
30

402
56
230
15

417
41
226
19

194
16
438
55

194
16
449
44

226
28
592
75

219
35
589
78

359
50
459
53

354
55
454
58

533
67
289
36

523
77
289
36

236
31
586
72

236
31
576
82

1.0 (reference)
0.9 (0.5-1.7)
1.0 (0.8-1.3)
0.9 (0.6-1.4)

1.0 (reference)
0.5 (0.3 to <1.0)
1.0 (0.8-1.2)
0.7 (0.5-1.1)

1.0 (reference)
0.8 (0.5-1.2)
0.9 (0.7-1.1)
0.9 (0.6-1.4)

1.0 (reference)
0.6 (0.4-1.0)
0.9 (0.7-1.1)
0.6 (0.4 to <1.0)

1.0 (reference)
1.1 (0.8-1.6)
1.1 (0.9-1.3)
0.6 (0.3-1.1)

1.0 (reference)
0.7 (0.4 to <1.0)
1.0 (0.8-1.2)
0.7 (0.4-1.2)

1.0 (reference)
0.7 (0.3-1.2)
0.9 (0.7-1.1)
0.9 (0.6-1.4)

1.0 (reference)
0.6 (0.3-1.1)
0.9 (0.7-1.2)
0.6 (0.4 to <1.0)

NOTE: Adjusted for age, BMI, lifetime vigorous leisure activity, energy intake, dietary fiber, dietary calcium, usual number of cigarettes smoked, and other TS
polymorphisms where appropriate (TSER, TS 3VUTR). P interaction values of gene-gene associations were not statistically significant on an additive or multiplicative scale
(data not shown).

MTHFR genotype, we investigated whether risk estimates of
TS, MTR, or RFC genotypes differed by PMH use. Among
PMH users, the variant TS genotypes were associated with
substantially reduced risk of colon cancer, whereas much
weaker associations were observed among non-PMH users
(Table 4). No such interactions were observed for MTR or RFC
(data not shown).

Discussion

Within this large population-based study of colon cancer, we
investigated polymorphisms in three folate-metabolizing
enzymes (TS, MTR, and MTHFR), as well as the relevant
carrier protein (RFC), thus addressing genetic variability in
multiple key proteins in this biological pathway. There is
strong evidence for the functional effect of MTHFR 677C>T
and TSER variant genotypes (14, 38-41), with some, yet less
well defined, evidence for the in vivo functional relevance of
MTR, RFC, and the TS 3V-UTR variant (16-18, 20-23, 42). Our
evaluations of colon cancer risk confirm this assessment, in
that there were no significant alterations in risk for MTR,
RFC, and TS polymorphisms, with the exception of a risk
reduction associated with the TSER variants among men. The
ORs for TSER are comparable with those from a previous

report by Chen et al. (43) among male physicians (OR, 0.9;
95% CI, 0.6-1.3 for the 2rpt/3rpt genotype and OR, 0.6; 95%
CI, 0.4-0.98 for the 2rpt/2rpt genotype). A statistically
significant trend towards reduced risk with the variant TSER
alleles was observed both here and in that population (43).
the variant TSER 2rpt/2rpt
These results indicate that
genotype reduces risk of colon or colorectal cancer among
men to a degree comparable with that of the MTHFR 677TT
genotype (44). As risk reductions for TSER variants were only
seen among women who are on postmenopausal hormones
but not among women overall, estrogen status may play a
role.

Further complexity is added as a result of the presence of
a second functionally relevant polymorphism in TS (15, 16).
We evaluated the combined effects of these genotypes as well
as haplotypes to discern possible risk patterns. The combined
TS wild type/wild type genotype constitutes only 8.3% of our
population. When compared with this wild type/wild type
reference group of putatively highest TS expression and TS
mRNA stability, the variant TSER genotypes were associated
with statistically significantly reduced risk among women (OR,
0.6; 95% CI, 0.4-0.9) yet not among men. Our sample sizes for
these sex-specific associations were limited, and results should
be followed up in large study populations that have the ability
to investigate combined genotypes as well as sex-specific ORs.

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

2514

Polymorphisms and Colon Cancer Risk

Table 4. Association among combined TS genotype, postmenopausal hormone (PMH) use, and colon cancer in
postmenopausal women

TS 3V-UTR 1494delTTAAAG genotype

ins/ins

ins/del and del/del

TSER genotype

Cases (n)

Controls (n)

OR (995% CI)

Cases (n)

Controls (n)

OR (95% CI)

No, PMH

3rpt/3rpt
3/2 or 2/2rpt

Yes, PMH
3rpt/3rpt
3/2 or 2/2rpt

41
178

21
48

42
208

9
89

1.0 (reference)
0.9 (0.5-1.4)

2.2 (0.9-5.4)
0.5 (0.3 to <1.0)

80
164

21
53

113
182

56
87

0.7 (0.4-1.2)
0.9 (0.5-1.4)

0.4 (0.2-0.7)
0.6 (0.3 to > 1.0)

NOTE: Adjusted for age, body mass index, lifetime vigorous activity, energy intake, dietary fiber, dietary calcium, and usual number of cigarettes smoked. P < 0.01
m2 test of slopes) for 3V-UTR insertion/insertion genotype across TSER
(Wald
genotypes.

m2 test of slopes) for TSER 3rpt/3rpt genotype across 3V-UTR genotypes. P = 0.03 (Wald

The presence of two common functional variants within TS
suggests that it is essential to take both of these into account
simultaneously.

The MTR polymorphism is less common (allele frequency =
0.20) and has been investigated in three epidemiologic studies,
including a large Norwegian cohort (7, 25, 45). Similar to our
findings, Le Marchand et al. (45) and Chen et al. (7) did not
report any associations between this variant and colon cancer
risk, whereas Ulvik et al. (25) observed a significantly reduced
risk among those with a GG genotype compared with wild-
type AA (OR, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.47-0.90). We observed reduced
risks among men (OR, 0.7), but the 95% CI included 1.0. As
only about 5% of the population have the homozygous variant
genotype, very large studies are needed to quantify the
strength of this association.

For gene-gene interactions, only combinations with the
MTHFR polymorphisms showed interesting patterns. This is
not surprising, because MTHFR is a key regulatory enzyme in
folate-mediated one-carbon metabolism, the activity of which
determines the distribution of
folate metabolites toward
nucleotide synthesis or methylation reactions. There is strong
evidence that the MTHFR 677C>T variant alters the balance of
metabolites within the pathway (39, 46). In combined analyses
of TS and MTHFR polymorphisms, we observed that men
carrying at least one variant TS allele (either TSER 2rpt or
TS 1494del) in addition to the MTHFR 677TT genotype were
at relatively lowest risk compared with all other groups (both
OR, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.4-0.9). This confirms our previous
observation in colorectal adenoma, where individuals with
low TS expression and low MTHFR activity genotypes also
experienced the lowest adenoma risk (OR, 0.56; ref. 10). If this
statistical interaction reflects biological mechanisms, then we
may hypothesize that the observed pattern suggests that a
greater diversion of
folate metabolites (specifically 5,10-
methylene-tetrahydrofolate) toward purine synthesis is pro-
tective for the development of colorectal neoplasia. Recent
findings by Quinlivan et al. suggest that folate depletion
adversely affects purine synthesis in humans and a greater
relative rate of adenine synthesis among individuals with the
MTHFR TT genotype (46). Depurination is the most common
type of DNA damage with f10,000 depurinations/cell/d
(47, 48). Although efficiently repaired, apurinic sites are
present in DNA. We recognize that one other study did not
observe this risk pattern, but their sample size was limited to
270 cases, with consequent restricted power for studying gene-
gene interactions (43).

Our investigations of gene-diet interactions confirmed, to
some extent, associations we have previously observed with
respect to TSER, and folate intake that reduced TS expression
(TSER 2rpt/2rpt) is associated with a reduced risk in the
presence of a low folate intake (10). However, this pattern was
seen only among men and also has not been observed in the

Health Professionals study (43). Again, if that pattern reflects a
biological mechanism, it would point toward purine synthesis
as a key link between one-carbon metabolism and colorectal
neoplasia. We were unable to confirm previously observed
gene-diet interactions for MTR in colorectal adenoma (26) and
did not see a clear pattern for RFC-diet interactions. However,
the RFC is the transporter for naturally occurring folates (in the
form of 5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate) but plays a smaller role in
the transport of folic acid (49). Thus, in populations, such as
the one described here, where folate intake from supplements
in the form of folic acid comprises a substantial proportion of
the overall folate intake, genetic variability in the RFC may not
be as relevant for the overall supply of folate metabolites.
Unfortunately, no quantitative information on supplement use
was available for this population.

Lastly, we observed differences in risk patterns dependent
on the past use of postmenopausal hormones. Interactions
between folate metabolism and PMH use are not implausible,
as there are links between homocysteine concentrations and
PMH use (50-53), and methylation of the estrogen receptor is
an early event in colorectal carcinogenesis, which may less
frequently occur in the presence of PMH (27, 54). We have
previously reported on a significant difference in risk patterns
of PMH-associated risks by MTHFR genotypes (13). However,
these interactions need to be confirmed by others, because
sample sizes were in parts insufficient to yield stable estimates.
Although this study is quite comprehensive with respect to
investigations of genetic variability in one-carbon metabolism
and risk of colon cancer, there are three important limitations.
First, our investigations did not include other genetic poly-
morphisms in folate-metabolizing enzymes that may be of
possible relevance, such as methionine-synthase reductase
(MTRR) or serine-hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT). Thus
far, MTRR does not seem related to colon cancer risk (45), and
the functional relevance of the cSHMT polymorphisms is
unclear. The study presented here focused on candidate
polymorphisms in key enzymes with substantial evidence for
functional effect; we hope to expand our investigations to other
relevant candidate polymorphisms as they are reported.

Second, there is now strong evidence that a subset of
colorectal cancer cases arises as part of a CpG island methylator
phenotype (55, 56). Information on CpG island methylator
phenotype status should be taken into account in future studies
investigating links between genetic variability in folate metab-
olism and risk of colorectal cancer.

A final

limitation is our current

inability to integrate
knowledge of biochemical relationships within the pathway
into the statistical analysis. Although an approach that uses
stratification for gene-nutrient or gene-gene interactions is
valuable, in that it allows for an empirical investigation of the
associations, it is also limited in that statistical power for
higher-order interactions is lacking, even within this large

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention

2515

study population. Because folate metabolism consists of
several interconnected cycles (see Fig. 1), such interactions
are to be expected. Our approach toward solving this problem
is to use, in the future, results from a mathematical model of
one-carbon biochemistry for investigations of multiple genetic
variants on selected biomarkers. Although this model is still
under development, preliminary results show that it replicates
the biochemical relationships in the folate cycle and methio-
nine cycle with reasonable accuracy (57, 58). Furthermore, our
group and others are developing methods to address this
key problem for molecular epidemiologic studies (59). Thus,
we hope that in the future, we will be able to achieve closer
integration of the biochemistry and statistical analysis. Because
there is strong evidence that disturbances in this biochemical
pathway can modify risk of several types of malignancies
(60-63), birth outcomes (64-66), and possibly cardiovascular
disease (67) and autism (68), a more thorough understanding
of the interplay of multiple genetic polymorphisms under
specific dietary conditions and their combined effect on bio-
markers and disease end points will be highly relevant.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sandra Edwards and Leslie Palmer at the University of Utah
for data collection efforts of this study, Clayton Hibbert and Linda
Massey for word processing assistance, and Juanita Leija for geno-
typing assays.

References
1. Wagner C. Biochemical role of folate in cellular metabolism. Folate in health

and disease. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1995.

2. World Cancer Research Fund. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of cancer: a
global perspective. Washington (DC): World Cancer Research Fund/
American Institute for Cancer Research; 1997.

3. Giovannucci E. Epidemiologic studies of folate and colorectal neoplasia: a

review. J Nutr 2002;132:2350 – 5S.

4. Marugame T, Tsuji E, Kiyohara C, et al. Relation of plasma folate and
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T polymorphism to colorectal
adenomas [comment]. Int J Epidemiol 2003;32:64 – 6.

5. Pufulete M, Al-Ghnaniem R, Leather AJ, et al. Folate status, genomic DNA
hypomethylation, and risk of colorectal adenoma and cancer: a case control
study. Gastroenterology 2003;124:1240 – 8.

6. Ma J, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci E, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase polymorphism, dietary interactions, and risk of colorectal cancer.
Cancer Res 1997;57:1098 – 102.

7. Chen J, Giovannucci E, Hankinson SE, et al. A prospective study of
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase and methionine synthase gene
polymorphisms, and risk of colorectal adenoma. Carcinogenesis 1998;19:
2129 – 32.
Slattery ML, Potter JD, Samowitz W, Schaffer D, Leppert M. Methylenete-
trahydrofolate reductase, diet, and risk of colon cancer. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:513 – 8.

8.

9. Ulrich CM, Kampman E, Bigler J, et al. Colorectal adenomas and the C677T
MTHFR polymorphism: evidence for gene-environment interaction? Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:659 – 68.

10. Ulrich CM, Bigler J, Bostick R, Fosdick L, Potter JD. Thymidylate synthase
promoter polymorphism, interaction with folate intake, and risk of color-
ectal adenomas. Cancer Res 2002;62:3361 – 4.

11. Choi SW, Mason JB. Folate and carcinogenesis: an integrated scheme. J Nutr

2000;130:129 – 32.

12. Duthie SJ. Folic acid deficiency and cancer: mechanisms of DNA instability.

Br Med Bull 1999;55:578 – 92.

13. Curtin K, Bigler J, Slattery ML, Caan B, Potter JD, Ulrich CM. MTHFR C677T
and A1298C polymorphisms: diet, estrogen, and risk of colon cancer. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2004;13:285 – 92.

14. Horie N, Aiba H, Oguro K, Hojo H, Takeishi K. Functional analysis and
DNA polymorphism of the tandemly repeated sequences in the 5V-terminal
regulatory region of the human gene for thymidylate synthase. Cell Struct
Funct 1995;20:191 – 7.

15. Ulrich C, Bigler J, Velicer C, Greene E, Farin F, Potter J. Searching expressed
sequence tag databases: discovery and confirmation of a common
polymorphism in the thymidylate synthase gene. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 2000;9:1381 – 5.

16. Mandola MV, Stoehlmacher J, Zhang W, et al. A 6 bp polymorphism in the
thymidylate synthase gene causes message instability and is associated with
decreased intratumoral TS mRNA levels. Pharmacogenetics 2004;14:319 – 27.
17. Chango A, Emery-Fillon N, de Courcy GP, et al. A polymorphism (80G->A)
in the reduced folate carrier gene and its associations with folate status and
homocysteinemia. Mol Genet Metab 2000;70:310 – 5.

18. Laverdiere C, Chiasson S, Costea I, Moghrabi A, Krajinovic M. Polymorph-
ism G80A in the reduced folate carrier gene and its relationship to
methotrexate plasma levels and outcome of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood 2002;100:3832 – 4.

19. Leclerc D, Wilson A, Dumas R, et al. Cloning and mapping of a cDNA for
methionine synthase reductase, a flavoprotein defective in patients with
homocystinuria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:3059 – 64.

20. Chen J, Stampfer MJ, Ma J, et al. Influence of a methionine synthase (D919G)
polymorphism on plasma homocysteine and folate levels and relation to risk
of myocardial infarction. Atherosclerosis 2001;154:667 – 72.

21. Harmon D, Shields D, Woodside J, et al. Methionine synthase D919G
polymorphism is a significant but modest determinant of circulating
homocysteine concentrations. Genet Epidemiol 1999;17:298 – 309.

22. Ma J, Stampfer MJ, Christensen B, et al. A polymorphism of

the
methionine synthase gene: association with plasma folate, vitamin B12,
homocyst(e)ine, and colorectal cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 1999;8:825 – 9.

23. van der Put NM, van der Molen EF, Kluijtmans LA, et al. Sequence analysis
of
the coding region of human methionine synthase: relevance to
hyperhomocysteinaemia in neural-tube defects and vascular disease. QJM
1997;90:511 – 7.
Jacques PF, Bostom AG, Selhub J, et al. Effects of polymorphisms of
methionine synthase and methionine synthase reductase on total plasma
homocysteine in the NHLBI Family Heart Study. Atherosclerosis 2003;
166:49 – 55.

24.

25. Ulvik A, Vollset SE, Hansen S, Gislefoss R, Jellum E, Ueland PM. Colorectal
cancer and the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 677C -> T and
methionine synthase 2756A -> G polymorphisms: a study of 2,168 case-
control pairs from the JANUS Cohort. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
2004;13:2175 – 80.

26. Goode EL, Potter JD, Bigler J, Ulrich CM. Methionine synthase D919G
polymorphism, folate metabolism, and colorectal adenoma risk. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2004;13:157 – 62.
Issa JP, Ottaviano YL, Celano P, Hamilton SR, Davidson NE, Baylin SB.
Methylation of the oestrogen receptor CpG island links ageing and neoplasia
in human colon. Nat Gen 1994;7:536 – 40.

27.

28. Slattery ML, Edwards SL, Caan BJ, Kerber RA, Potter JD. Response rates
among control subjects in case-control studies. Ann Epidemiol 1995;5:245 – 9.
29. Slattery ML, Caan BJ, Duncan D, Berry TD, Coates A, Kerber R. A
computerized diet history questionnaire for epidemiologic studies. J Am
Diet Assoc 1994;94:761 – 6.

30. Edwards S, Slattery ML, Mori M, et al. Objective system for interviewer
performance evaluation for use in epidemiologic studies. Am J Epidemiol
1994;140:1020 – 8.

31. Liu K, Slattery M, Jacobs D, Jr., et al. A study of the reliability and

comparative validity of the cardia dietary history. Ethn Dis 1994;4:15 – 27.

32. Kampman E, Slattery ML, Bigler J, et al. Meat consumption, genetic
susceptibility, and colon cancer risk: a United States multicenter case-control
study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 1999;8:15 – 24.

33. Excoffier L, Slatkin M. Maximum-likelihood estimation of molecular
haplotype frequencies in a diploid population. Mol Biol Evol 1995;12:921 – 7.
34. Stram DO, Haiman CA, Hirschhorn JN, et al. Choosing haplotype-tagging
SNPS based on unphased genotype data using a preliminary sample of
unrelated subjects with an example from the Multiethnic Cohort Study.
Hum Hered 2003;55:27 – 36.

35. Hosmer DW, Lemeshow S. Confidence interval estimation of interaction.

Epidemiology 1992;3:452 – 6.

36. Ulrich CM, Robien K, Sparks R. Pharmacogenetics and folate metabolism - a

promising direction. Pharmacogenomics 2002;3:299 – 313.

37. Ulrich CM, Potter JD. Thymidylate synthase polymorphism and survival of
colorectal cancer patients treated with 5-fluorouracil [comment]. Br J Cancer
2002;86:22.

38. Frosst P, Blom HJ, Milos R, et al. A candidate genetic risk factor for vascular
disease: a common mutation in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase [letter].
Nat Gen 1995;10:111 – 3.

39. Bagley PJ, Selhub J. A common mutation in the methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase gene is associated with an accumulation of formylated tetrahy-
drofolates in red blood cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:13217 – 20.

40. Pullarkat ST, Stoehlmacher J, Ghaderi V, et al. Thymidylate synthase gene
polymorphism determines response and toxicity of 5-FU chemotherapy.
Pharmacogenomics J 2001;1:65 – 70.

41. Trinh BN, Ong C-N, Coetzee GA, Yu MC, Laird PW. Thymidylate synthase:
a novel genetic determinant of plasma homocysteine and folate levels. Hum
Genet 2002;111:299 – 302.

42. Whetstine JR, Gifford AJ, Witt T, et al. Single nucleotide polymorphisms in
the human reduced folate carrier: characterization of a high-frequency G/A
variant at position 80 and transport properties of the His(27) and Arg(27)
carriers. Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:3416 – 22.

43. Chen J, Hunter DJ, Stampfer MJ, et al. Polymorphism in the thymidylate
synthase promoter enhancer region modifies the risk and survival of
colorectal cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2003;12:958 – 62.

44. Houlston RS, Tomlinson IP. Polymorphisms and colorectal tumor risk.

Gastroenterology 2001;121:282 – 301.

45. Le Marchand L, Donlon T, Hankin JH, Kolonel LN, Wilkens LR, Seifried A.
B-vitamin intake, metabolic genes, and colorectal cancer risk (United States).
Cancer Causes Control 2002;13:239 – 48.

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

2516 Polymorphisms and Colon Cancer Risk

46. Quinlivan EP, Davis SR, Shelnutt KP, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase 677C>T polymorphism and folate status affect one-carbon
incorporation into human DNA deoxynucleosides. J Nutr 2005;135:389 – 96.
47. Lindahl T, Nyberg B. Rate of depurination of native deoxyribonucleic acid.

Biochemistry 1972;11:3610 – 8.

48. Nakamura J, Swenberg JA. Endogenous apurinic/apyrimidinic sites in

genomic DNA of mammalian tissues. Cancer Res 1999;59:2522 – 6.

49. Antony AC. The biological chemistry of folate receptors. Blood 1992;79:

2807 – 20.

50. van Baal WM, Smolders RG, van der Mooren MJ, Teerlink T, Kenemans P.
Hormone replacement therapy and plasma homocysteine levels. Obstet
Gynecol 1999;94:485 – 91.

51. Smolders RG, Vogelvang TE, Mijatovic V, et al. A 2-year, randomized,
comparative, placebo-controlled study on the effects of raloxifene on
lipoprotein(a) and homocysteine. Maturitas 2002;41:105 – 14.

52. Somekawa Y, Kobayashi K, Tomura S, Aso T, Hamaguchi H. Effects of
hormone replacement therapy and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase
polymorphism on plasma folate and homocysteine levels in postmenopausal
Japanese women. Fertil Steril 2002;77:481 – 6.

53. Mijatovic V, van der Mooren MJ. Homocysteine in postmenopausal women
and the importance of hormone replacement therapy. Clin Chem Lab Med
2001;39:764 – 7.

54. Baylin SB, Herman JG, Graff JR, Vertino PM, Issa JP. Alterations in DNA
methylation: a fundamental aspect of neoplasia. Adv Cancer Res 1998;72:
141 – 96.
Issa JP. Opinion: CpG island methylator phenotype in cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer 2004;4:988 – 93.

55.

56. Laird PW. Cancer epigenetics. Hum Mol Genet 2005;14 Spec No 1:R65 – 76.
57. Reed MC, Nijhout HF, Sparks R, Ulrich CM. A mathematical model of the

methionine cycle. J Theor Biol 2004;226:33 – 43.

58. Nijhout HF, Reed MC, Budu P, Ulrich CM. A mathematical model of the
folate cycle: new insights into folate homeostasis. J Biol Chem 2004;279:
55008 – 16.

59. Thomas DC. The need for a systematic approach to complex pathways
in molecular epidemiology. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14:
557 – 9.

60. Skibola CF, Forrest MS, Coppede F, et al. Polymorphisms and haplotypes in
folate-metabolizing genes and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Blood 2004;
104:2155 – 62.

61. Skibola CF, Smith MT, Hubbard A, et al. Polymorphisms in the thymidylate
synthase and serine hydroxymethyltransferase genes and risk of adult acute
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 2002;99:3786 – 91.

62. Skibola CF, Smith MT, Kane E, et al. Polymorphisms in the methylenete-
trahydrofolate reductase gene are associated with susceptibility to acute
leukemia in adults. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:12810 – 5.

63. Wiemels JL, Smith RN, Taylor GM, et al. Methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase (MTHFR) polymorphisms and risk of molecularly defined
subtypes of childhood acute leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:
4004 – 9.

64. Nurk E, Tell GS, Refsum H, Ueland PM, Vollset SE. Associations between
maternal methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase polymorphisms and adverse
outcomes of pregnancy: the Hordaland Homocysteine Study. Am J Med
2004;117:26 – 31.

65. O’Leary VB, Parle-McDermott A, Molloy AM, et al. MTRR and MTHFR
link to Down syndrome? Am J Med Genet 2002;107:

polymorphism:
151 – 5.

66. Schwahn B, Rozen R. Polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase gene: clinical consequences. Am J Pharmacogenomics 2001;1:
189 – 201.

67. De Bree A, Verschuren WM, Kromhout D, Kluijtmans LA, Blom HJ.
Homocysteine determinants and the evidence to what extent homo-
cysteine determines the risk of coronary heart disease. Pharmacol Rev
2002;54:599 – 618.
James SJ, Cutler P, Melnyk S, et al. Metabolic biomarkers of increased
oxidative stress and impaired methylation capacity in children with autism.
Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1611 – 7.

68.

Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;14(11). November 2005

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

Polymorphisms in the Reduced Folate Carrier, Thymidylate
Synthase, or Methionine Synthase and Risk of Colon 
(cid:160) 
Cornelia M. Ulrich, Karen Curtin, John D. Potter, et al. 
(cid:160) 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev(cid:160)

2005;14:2509-2516. 

Cancer

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

Updated version
(cid:160) 

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/14/11/2509
 
(cid:160) 

Cited articles
(cid:160) 
Citing articles
(cid:160) 

This article cites 66 articles, 27 of which you can access for free at:
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/14/11/2509.full#ref-list-1
 
(cid:160) 
This article has been cited by 19 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
 
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/14/11/2509.full#related-urls
(cid:160) 

E-mail alerts
(cid:160) 
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
(cid:160) 
Permissions
(cid:160) 

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

pubs@aacr.org
.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at
(cid:160) 
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
http://cebp.aacrjournals.org/content/14/11/2509
.
Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's
(CCC)
Rightslink site. 
(cid:160) 

Downloaded from 

cebp.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2005 American Association for Cancer Research.

Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

www.elsevier.com/locate/mce

Functionally relevant polymorphisms in the human nuclear

vitamin D receptor gene

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld, Lenore S. Remus, Peter W. Jurutka, Heike Zitzer, Anish K. Oza,

Hope T.L. Dang, Carol A. Haussler, Michael A. Galligan, Michelle L. Thatcher,

Carlos Encinas Dominguez, Mark R. Haussler *

Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, 1501 N. Campbell A6e., Uni6ersity of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA

Abstract

The functional signiﬁcance of two unlinked human vitamin D receptor (hVDR) gene polymorphisms was evaluated in twenty
human ﬁbroblast cell lines. Genotypes at both a Fok I restriction site (F/f ) in exon II and a singlet (A) repeat in exon IX (L/S)
were determined, and relative transcription activities of endogenous hVDR proteins were measured using a transfected,
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-responsive reporter gene. Observed activities ranged from 2–100-fold induction by hormone, with
higher activity being displayed by the F and the L biallelic forms. Only when genotypes at both sites were considered
simultaneously did statistically signiﬁcant differences emerge. Moreover, the correlation between hVDR activity and genotype
segregated further into clearly deﬁned high and low activity groups with similar genotypic distributions. These results not only
demonstrate functional relevance for both the F/f and L/S common polymorphisms in hVDR, but also provide novel evidence
for a third genetic variable impacting receptor potency. © 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Vitamin D receptor; Gene polymorphisms; Pharmacogenomics

1. Introduction

The biological actions of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
[1,25(OH)2D3] are mediated largely, if not entirely, by
the vitamin D receptor (VDR), a member of the super-
family of nuclear hormone receptors (Whitﬁeld et al.,
1999). This protein is found in tissues known to play a
role in calcium homeostasis, and also in numerous
other tissues, where it appears to regulate a variety of
processes, including cell proliferation and differentia-
tion (Haussler et al., 1998). The signiﬁcance of the
nuclear VDR in calcium homeostasis, as well as in
certain differentiation and proliferation processes in
skin and uterus, has been conﬁrmed by gene knockout
studies in mice (Li et al., 1998; Kato et al., 1999).

A simpliﬁed diagram that illustrates how nuclear
hVDR mediates
transcriptional activation by the
1,25(OH)2D3 hormone is shown in Fig. 1A. The key
features of this model are: (i) liganding of nuclear VDR

* Corresponding author: Tel.: +1-520-6266033;

fax: +1-520-

6269015.

E-mail address: haussler@u.arizona.edu (M.R. Haussler).

by 1,25(OH)2D3; (ii) recruitment by 1,25(OH)2D3-VDR
of its retinoid X receptor (RXR) heteropartner that, in
turn, facilitates high-afﬁnity interaction of the dimeric
complex with vitamin D responsive elements (VDREs)
upstream of target genes; (iii) attraction by VDR of
basal transcription factor IIB (TFIIB), the rate-limiting
component of the transcription preinitiation complex;
and (iv) recruitment by the heterodimer of a number of
transcription coactivators, some with histone acetyl
transferase (HAT) activity to modify nucleosome/chro-
matin organization, such as SRC-1 (Gill et al., 1998),
and others like the DRIPs (Rachez et al., 1999) that
target the VDR supercomplex to the TATA-box/TBP
and RNA polymerase II transcription initiation ma-
chinery. The net result of this 1,25(OH)2D3-triggered
response is the regulation of genes coding for proteins
that carry out intestinal calcium absorption, bone re-
modeling, cell differentiation, etc. (Jurutka et al., 2001).
A modular diagram of the functional domains within
the hVDR protein is presented in Fig. 1B. The details
of the hVDR subdomain arrangement (see ﬁgure leg-
end) basically follow the general pattern for the sub-

0303-7207/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 3 0 3 - 7 2 0 7 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 4 0 6 - 3

146

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

family of nuclear receptors that heterodimerize with
RXR, such as the all-trans retinoic acid receptors (RARs)
and the thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) (Whitﬁeld et
al., 1999). For the purposes of the present communica-
tion, the most relevant regions of hVDR are the hor-
mone-binding domain, encoded by exons VI–IX of the
human gene (see also Fig. 2), the DNA binding domain/
zinc ﬁngers, encoded by exons II–IV, and a set of
discontinuous transactivation domains,
including re-
gions at the N-terminus (for TFIIB docking) (Jurutka et
al., 2000), and in helices 3 and 12 (for coactivator
recruitment). Since transactivation is the ultimate bio-
chemical action of the liganded VDR and depends on all
of the other capabilities of the receptor (ligand binding,
nuclear localization, heterodimerization and VDRE/
DNA binding), the present study focuses on this parame-
ter of receptor activity in order to probe for functional
signiﬁcance of hVDR gene polymorphisms.

The chromosomal gene for VDR has been cloned
(Miyamoto et al., 1997), and several common genetic
variants have been described in humans, most of which
are identiﬁed by a biallelic variation in a restriction
endonuclease site (Fig. 2). Genetic variation in the 3%
region of the hVDR gene is observed in speciﬁc intronic
sites for Bsm I (Morrison et al., 1992) and Apa I (Faraco
et al., 1989), a silent Taq I site in exon IX (Morrison et
al., 1992), as well as in a singlet(A) repeat in the portion
of exon IX encoding the 3% UTR (Ingles et al., 1997a) (see
Fig. 2, right). All of these variations near the 3% end of
the gene are in linkage disequilibrium (Morrison et al.,
1992; Verbeek et al., 1997), although this linkage is
weaker in some ethnic groups such as African-Americans
(Ingles et al., 1997a). Interestingly, none of these poly-
morphisms affect the structure of the VDR protein itself,
although the singlet(A) repeat in the 3% UTR is expressed
in the mature mRNA for hVDR. Singlet(A) variants are
classiﬁed according to length by the number of consec-
utive A’s in the repeat, with ]17 A’s scored as ‘long’
(L), and 515 A’s considered ‘short’ (S).

Another polymorphic site has been found in exon II
near the center of the hVDR gene (Saijo et al., 1991). This
site, which is genetically unlinked to the above Bsm/Apa/
Taq/singlet(A) cluster, is unique among common hVDR
variants described so far, in that it results in an alteration
of the hVDR protein structure (Fig. 2, bottom center).
Presence of the Fok I site (designated f ) predicts that a
427-residue VDR protein will be produced beginning at
Met-1 (M1 according to the numbering scheme of Baker
et al. (1988), whereas absence of this site (denoted F)
dictates translation from Met-4 (M4), producing a
protein of 424 amino acids (Arai et al., 1997).

In an initial report (Morrison et al., 1994), allelic
variation in the chromosomal gene for the vitamin D
receptor was proposed to represent a major part of the
genetic predisposition for low bone mineral density
(BMD), and perhaps for osteoporosis and/or skeletal

Fig. 1. (A) Model for transcriptional activation by 1,25(OH)2D3 as
mediated by a heterodimer of VDR and RXR bound to VDREs
upstream of target genes in vitamin-D responsive cells. As the pri-
mary receptor, VDR is activated by 1,25(OH)2D3 binding, but the
RXR coreceptor apparently can remain unliganded. The receptor
heterodimer associates with direct repeat-type responsive elements
upstream of the target genes and the liganded heterocomplex at-
tracts various coactivators, some with histone acetylase (HAT) ac-
tivity. VDR itself recruits basal transcription factor IIB (TFIIB).
Finally,
the ensemble of protein-protein-DNA interactions pro-
motes transcriptional initiation of a battery of target genes, leading
to the pleiotrophic effects of the 1,25(OH)2D3 hormone (Haussler
et al., 1998). (B) Schematic illustration of functional domains in the
VDR protein. The DNA binding domain, with two zinc ﬁnger
motifs,
is located near the N-terminus and also contains residues
that promote nuclear localization of the receptor. The central and
C-terminal region of the receptor contain subdomains that mediate
ligand binding (Rochel et al., 2000). The heterodimerization (with
RXR) and transactivation functions of hVDR appear to be medi-
ated by widely separated regions of the receptor. Heterodimeriza-
tion is supported by heptad repeats in the helix 7–10 region
(Nakajima et al., 1994), an E1 domain (Whitﬁeld et al., 1995), as
well as residues in the T-box and ﬁrst zinc ﬁnger (Hsieh et al.,
1995). Transactivation regions include: (i) the extreme N-terminus,
which possesses a TFIIB docking site (Jurutka et al., 2000); (ii) a
centrally located domain corresponding to helix 3 in the rat TRa,
hRARg and hVDR ligand binding domain crystals (Renaud et al.,
1995; Wagner et al., 1995; Kraichely et al., 1999; Rochel et al.,
2000); and (iii) the extreme C-terminus, corresponding to helix 12
in the rat TRa, hRARg and hVDR crystals (Renaud et al., 1995;
Wagner et al., 1995; Jurutka et al., 1997; Rochel et al., 2000). ‘A’
designates
important DNA-binding
amino acids (Hsieh et al., 1999). The residue 159–201 segment,
which is unconserved in VDRs, is encoded by a novel exon (V),
not seen in other nuclear receptors for which the gene structure is
known (Haussler et al., 1998).

the A-box, which contains

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

147

Fig. 2. The human VDR gene, with key features relevant to polymorphic variation in VDR expression and activity. The ﬁfteen known exons are
depicted at the top (Miyamoto et al., 1997; Crofts et al., 1998). The 5% untranslated region of hVDR mRNAs is observed to be alternatively spliced
in all tested human tissues (Crofts et al., 1998). The predominant hVDR mRNA in tissues tested to date contains a 5% UTR consisting of exon
IA spliced to IC; several other less abundant spliced forms have been described, implying the existence of at least three promoters for the hVDR
gene, depicted by arrows above exons IF, IA and ID, respectively, (Crofts et al., 1998). Exons II and III encode the translation start site, a short
N-terminal domain, and the two zinc ﬁnger motifs of the DNA binding domain (one in each exon). The overlapping ligand-binding and strong
heterodimerization domains are encoded by exons VI–IX, with exon IX also containing the entire 3% UTR. At right are shown four linked
polymorphic sites in or somewhat 5% to exon IX. The present study focuses on the singlet(A) repeat, which lies about 1 kb upstream of the
polyadenylation site and exists in either a long (L=17–24 A’s) or a short (S=10–15 A’s) form (Ingles et al., 1997a). An additional site of interest
to the current study is the dimorphic translational start site (Saijo et al., 1991), the two forms of which (F or f, illustrated at bottom center) are
unlinked to the L/S variants (Gross et al., 1996).

fractures, although these associations have been dis-
puted by other studies [reviewed in (Wood and Fleet,
1998)]. More recently, correlations have been reported
between VDR allelic variants and risk of prostate can-
cer (Ingles et al., 1997b; Watanabe et al., 1999), breast
cancer (Ingles et al., 1997c; Ruggiero et al., 1998;
Curran et al., 1999), sporadic primary hyperparathy-
roidism (Correa et al., 1999), and sarcoidosis (Niimi et
al., 1999). However, conﬂicting reports have appeared
that minimize or even contradict these associations
(Cheng and Tsai, 1999; Correa et al., 1999). Likewise,
direct testing of hVDR alleles for activity has yielded
somewhat variable results, although, when a difference
is found, the b and F hVDR alleles appear to be more
active than the B or f alleles (see Section 4).

One caveat in most of the above-cited studies is that
correlations were sought between a single, speciﬁc poly-
morphism, or between the Bsm-Apa-Taq linkage group,
and the physiological parameter of interest. Very few
studies have attempted to control for hVDR genotype
at both the Bsm/Apa/Taq/singlet(A) cluster and the
Fok I site. In one example (Ferrari et al., 1998), a
correlation between Fok I alleles and BMD could not
be demonstrated, but ‘cross-genotyping’ with Bsm I
alleles revealed a potentially important positive associa-
tion in prepubertal girls between the ffBB hVDR geno-
type and low BMD (Ferrari et al., 1998).

Another caveat in the above cited studies is that a
direct inﬂuence of allelic variation on VDR expression
or activity was not demonstrated,
leaving open the
possibility that the observed correlation might be due

to linkage to another nearby site or even to a different
gene. In the only two extant studies in which the
potential relationship between genotype and activity of
the hVDR protein was evaluated (Verbeek et al., 1997;
Gross et al., 1998), no functional inﬂuence of speciﬁc
alleles was observed, but again, only a single polymor-
phic site was examined in isolation.

In the present communication, we report an evalua-
tion of a panel of twenty human ﬁbroblast lines. The
current protocol includes simultaneous consideration of
the hVDR genotypes at both the singlet(A) and the Fok
I loci, which are then correlated with activity of the
endogenous VDR in the corresponding cell line. From
these data, we conclude that (a) biallelic variants at the
Fok I and the singlet(A) sites, in combination, affect
transcriptional activation by the endogenous hVDR in
the tested human ﬁbroblasts; (b) the singlet(A) L allele
is more active than the S allele; and (c) a third, un-
known genetic variable appears to inﬂuence VDR
activity.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Plasmid DNAs used for transfection and in 6itro
transcription

The

reporter

1,25(OH)2D3-responsive

plasmid,
(CT4)4TKGH, contains four copies of the rat osteocal-
cin VDRE (Terpening et al., 1991) linked upstream of
the thymidine kinase promoter-GH reporter gene

148

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

(Nichols Institute, San Juan Capistrano, CA). The
hVDR expression vector, pSG5-hVDR, expressing the
F/M4 isoform of hVDR, has been described earlier
(Hsieh et al., 1991). This construct was adapted for
expression of the f/M1 hVDR isoform by inserting the
appropriate DNA codons via in vitro site-directed mu-
tagenesis (Jurutka et al., 2000). For monitoring the
efﬁciency of transfection, a commercial plasmid ex-
pressing b-galactosidase (CMV-bgal) was obtained
from Promega Corp. (Madison, WI).

2.2. Cell lines

Cell lines DNF-BJ, DWF-CV and DWF-TW were
provided courtesy of C. Bloch at the Children’s Hospi-
tal, Denver, CO. Patients DWF-CV and DWF-TW are
reported to have features of William’s Syndrome. Other
cell lines were obtained from the American Type Cul-
ture Collection, Manassas, VA, with patients Ber Lin,
Be Sal and Ran Nor reported to have late-onset
osteoporosis.

2.3. Transfection of cultured cells and transcriptional
acti6ation assay

cell

lines were

Human ﬁbroblast

cultured in
DMEM:Ham’s F12 medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100
mg/ml streptomycin. Cells were transfected by electro-
poration (see Fig. 3, top left). Brieﬂy, cells were col-
lected by trypsinization, pelleted at
low speed and

resuspended at 5×106 cells per ml in 1X HeBS buffer
(20 mM HEPES, pH 7.1, 137 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl,
0.7 mM Na2HPO4, 6 mM dextrose). Suspended cells
(0.8 ml) were then combined with 40 mg (CT4)4 TKGH
reporter plasmid, 10 mg of CMV-bgal plasmid, and 450
mg carrier DNA (pTZ18U plasmid), and adjusted to a
total volume of 1 ml in 1X HeBS buffer in a 0.4 cm
electrode gap electroporation cuvette. Each cuvette was
then subjected to electroporation in a Bio-Rad Gene
Pulser II apparatus (with capacitance extender attach-
ment) at settings of 200 V and 950 mF. After 10 min of
incubation at room temperature,
the electroporated
cells were suspended in culture medium and then di-
vided into six 60 mm culture dishes and incubated at
37°C for 72 h in the presence of 10− 8 M 1,25(OH)2D3
(three plates) or ethanol vehicle (also in triplicate
plates). The levels of growth hormone secreted into the
culture medium were
then assessed by radioim-
munoassay using a commercial kit (Nichols Institute)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. To normalize
results for the efﬁciency of transfection in each plate,
b-galactosidase levels were assayed in cell
lysates
(freeze-thaw method) using reagents and instructions
from a commercial kit (Promega Corp.). These steps
are represented as a ﬂow chart in Fig. 3 (left).

For the experiment depicted in Fig. 7, ROS 2/3 cells
(8×105 cells per 60 mm dish) were transfected by
calcium phosphate coprecipitation as described earlier
(Jurutka et al., 2000) using 10 mg of a reporter plasmid
containing 1100 bp of the natural rat osteocalcin pro-
moter linked to the human growth hormone gene [de-

Fig. 3. Protocol for VDR genotype/phenotype analysis of human ﬁbroblast cell lines. Cultured cells (top center) were transfected, incubated and
assayed for relative transcriptional activity as depicted schematically at the left and detailed in Section 2. Results were expressed as fold-induction
by 1,25(OH)2D3. Cells of each line were also harvested for genomic DNA isolation and genotyping by PCR as shown at the upper right. For
determination of singlet(A) repeat length, multiple PCR products from exon IX of each line were sequenced individually (see sample gel at far
right). PCR products of exon II were digested with the Fok I restriction enzyme and resolved by electrophoresis (see sample gel at center-right).
Final results for each cell line thus included the genotype at both the 3% UTR singlet(A) site (L/S), and the translation initiation site (F/f ), along
with relative transactivation activity of the endogenous VDR (see sample summary graph at bottom center).

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

149

noted BGP-TKGH (Terpening et al., 1991)], along with
1.0 mg of pSG5-hVDR expressing either F/M4 or f/M1
hVDR. Sixteen hours post-transfection, the cells were
washed, and refed (DMEM:Ham’s F-12 medium sup-
plemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100
mg/ml
streptomycin) and treated with 10− 8 M
1,25(OH)2D3 or ethanol vehicle. After 24 h, the level of
secreted growth hormone was assayed in the culture
medium from each plate as described above.

2.4. Genotyping of human ﬁbroblasts

DNA was prepared from cultured human ﬁbroblasts
(107 cells) using the QIAmp tissue kit (Qiagen Inc.,
Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. For F/f genotyping, isolated genomic DNA (500
ng) was combined with 100 ng each of primers 2a and
2b (Gross et al., 1996), along with 5 ml of 10X buffer
(Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT) plus 1.5 mM MgCl2, 2.5
mM each of dATP, dCTP, dTTP and dGTP, and 0.25
ml Taq DNA polymerase (Roche Molecular Biochemi-
cals, Indianapolis, IN). PCR conditions were: 20 cycles
at 94°C for 30 s, 74°C for 30 s (with −0.1°C per cycle)
and 72°C for 60 s. This was followed by 25 cycles at
94°C for 30 s, 63°C for 30 s and 72°C for 60 s.
Approximately, 200 ng of unpuriﬁed PCR product was
then incubated with 1 ml Fok I enzyme (New England
Biolabs, Beverly, MA) and 1 ml 10X buffer in a total
volume of 10 ml for 1.5 h at 37°C. The digestion
mixture was electrophoresed on a 4% NuSieve (3:1)
Agarose gel in TBE buffer (90 mM Tris–borate, pH8,
2 mM EDTA) to determine whether the PCR product
was completely digested (indicating the ff genotype),
partially digested (Ff ) or completely undigested (FF).
For L/S genotyping, isolated genomic DNA (500 ng)
was combined with 5% and 3% primers (100 ng each)
(Ingles et al., 1997b) using the same PCR proﬁle de-
scribed above. PCR products at approximately 400–
425 bp were resolved on 0.8% Agarose gels, excised
from the gel and isolated into 20 ml of Tris–HCl, pH
8.5, using a QIAEX II extraction kit (Qiagen Inc.)
according to the protocol of the manufacturer. The
isolated PCR products (7.5 ml) were then cloned into
the T-vector and transformed into the XL-1 Blue strain
of E. coli using a T-vector kit (Promega Corp.). Plas-
mid DNA was isolated from transformed bacteria by
standard methods and sequenced (‘A’ reaction only)
using a T7 Sequenase kit (Amersham Pharmacia Bio-
tech, Piscataway, NJ). Typical results are depicted in
Fig. 3 (right).

2.5. GST coprecipitation assays

The ability of either F/M4 or f/M1 hVDRs to inter-
act with human TFIIB was assessed as described earlier
(Jurutka et al., 2000). Brieﬂy, TFIIB-glutathione-S-

transferase (GST) fusion protein was expressed from
pGEX-2T-hTFIIB (Baniahmad et al., 1993) and GST
alone was expressed from pGEX-4T, both in E. coli
strain DH5a. Each protein was then coupled to glu-
tathione Sepharose. For the GST ‘pull-down’ assays,
pSG5-hVDR vectors expressing either F/M4 or f/M1
hVDRs were used to generate [35S] methionine-labeled
proteins utilizing the TNT Coupled Reticulocyte Lysate
kit (Promega Corp.). The desired 35S-labeled protein
was then incubated with the beads in the absence or
presence of 1,25(OH)2D3 (10 − 6 M). Next, the unbound
proteins were washed from the beads with 4×1 ml
wash buffer [0.15 M KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 1
mM EDTA, 0.3 mM ZnCl2, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1%
Tween-20, 1 mg/ml BSA, and the following protease
inhibitors, obtained from Roche Molecular Biochemi-
cals (Indianapolis, IN): 0.5 mg/ml Pefabloc SC, 15
mg/ml aprotinin, 1 mg/ml pepstatin A, 1 mg/ml
leu-
peptin]. The bound proteins were extracted from the
beads into 40 ml loading buffer (2% SDS, 5% b-mercap-
toethanol, 125 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, and 20% glyc-
erol), boiled for 3 min, separated by SDS-PAGE and
visualized via autoradiography.

3. Results

3.1. Genotyping of human ﬁbroblast lines

As described in Section 2 and depicted schematically
in Fig. 3, genomic DNA samples were extracted from
twenty human ﬁbroblast cell lines, subjected to PCR
using two independent sets of primers, and analyzed for
their hVDR genotype at the polymorphic sites in exon
II (F/f ) and exon IX (L/S). F/f genotypes were deter-
mined by digestion of the PCR products from each line
with the restriction enzyme Fok I (Gross et al., 1996).
Two independent PCR reactions were performed for
each line, and digestion experiments included a ff and
Ff line as positive controls to monitor activity of the
Fok I restriction endonuclease. A typical digestion pat-
tern is shown at the center-right of Fig. 3, displaying
the undigested PCR product (265 bp), partially digested
DNA from a heterozygote, and completely digested
DNA (69 and 196 bp fragments) from an ff subject.
The frequencies of the F and f alleles in the present
sample group were 62.5 and 37.5%, respectively. This
distribution of hVDR alleles is similar to that charac-
terized for Caucasian populations in other studies
(Gross et al., 1996; Eccleshall et al., 1998; Gennari et
al., 1999).

L/S genotypes were determined by sequencing of
PCR products to ascertain the exact length of the
singlet(A) repeat (Ingles et al., 1997b). As reported by
others (Ingles et al., 1997a), we observed (Fig. 4) multi-
ple alleles at this locus which segregate into a ‘long’ (L)

150

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

tion with a 1,25(OH)2D3-responsive reporter plasmid
and incubation in the presence or absence of 10− 8 M
1,25(OH)2D3, expressed as fold-induction by the hor-
mone. The assay conditions,
including quantitative
monitoring of transfection efﬁciency using a b-galac-
tosidase vector, were designed to permit comparison of
endogenous VDR activity between cell lines. The data
(Fig. 5) reveal a striking spectrum of activities, ranging
from only a 1.75-fold induction of the growth hormone
reporter within the 72-h treatment period to a 100-fold
effect of hormone, with a mean of 28924 (S.D.) fold
induction. The lowest activity (1.75-fold induction by
1,25(OH)2D3) was observed in a ﬁbroblast line derived
from a 5-week-old embryo. As denoted in Fig. 5, a
subset of the tested ﬁbroblast cell lines are from pa-
tients with either osteoporosis (*), in which subjects are
usually normocalcemic, but can have low blood cal-
cium, or with William’s Syndrome (§), a condition
frequently presenting with hypercalcemia. Interestingly,
one of the William’s patients (DWF-CV) contains en-
dogenous VDR with the highest activity (100-fold in-
duction by 1,25(OH)2D3), while the other patient
displays
by
1,25(OH)2D3. Conversely, one of the osteoporosis pa-
tients (Ran Nor) yielded a very low VDR activity in the
assay (6-fold induction), while the two other os-
teoporotic individuals (Be Sal, Ber Lin) displayed in-
ductions by hormone that were only slightly below
average (18- and 22-fold, respectively). No other associ-
ations were noted between patient status (e.g., age, sex
or medical condition) and VDR activity (see Section 4).

near-average

a

(23-fold)

induction

3.3. Correlations between either Fok I or L/S genotype
and acti6ity of endogenous VDR

Given the current interest in the Fok I and L/S
hVDR polymorphisms, correlations were next sought
between the genotypes of each cell line at these two loci
and the relative activities of the corresponding endoge-
nous VDRs. Accordingly, all twenty cell lines examined
were grouped into ff (4 lines), Ff (7 lines) or FF (9
lines). The average fold-inductions by 1,25(OH)2D3 for
each group are displayed (9S.E.M.) in Fig. 6A. Al-
though no clear trend is evident, it is notable that the
FF group displays the highest average fold-induction by
the hormonal ligand. These F/f groupings were then
subdivided into sets with the LS genotype (Fig. 6C, left
panel) and the LL genotype (Fig. 6C, right panel),
thereby controlling for the L/S genotype when evaluat-
ing the activity of endogenous F/f hVDR. Again, in
both groups of data, the FF cells display the highest
activity. However, none of
the differences between
groupings in either Fig. 6A or 6C achieve statistical
signiﬁcance (at
the 95% conﬁdence interval), pre-
sumably because of the small number of cell lines in
each grouping or the possible existence of a novel

Fig. 4. Compilation of sequencing results from L/S genotyping
(approximately 4–5 sequences per cell line). Variations of 1–2 A’s
were observed in separate sequencing reactions from the same cell
line, presumably because of errors in PCR (Ingles et al., 1997a) or in
the bacterial replication of these repeated sequences. Allele frequen-
cies in the present sample of 20 cell lines were 40% S and 60% L,
nearly identical to published results of 41% S for Caucasians living in
the USA (Ingles et al., 1997a).

group with 17–24 A’s in the repeat, and a ‘short’ group
(S) with 10–15 A’s in the repeat. The frequencies of the
L and S hVDR alleles in the present panel of cell lines
were 60 and 40%, respectively, similar to that earlier
published for Caucasian populations (Ingles et al.,
1997a).

3.2. Relati6e VDR transcriptional acti6ities of human
ﬁbroblast cell lines

Fig. 5 shows the hVDR-mediated transcription re-
sults from 20 human ﬁbroblast cell lines after transfec-

Fig. 5. Relative transcriptional activity of endogenous VDR in 20
human ﬁbroblast lines. Results from all cell lines (average of ]6
experiments, each in triplicate (9S.E.M.) are arranged in order of
increasing fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3. Cell lines DWF-TW and
DWF-CV (§) were obtained from patients with features of William’s
Syndrome, and patients Ran Nor, Be Sal and Ber Lin (*) had
late-onset osteoporosis. All other lines were taken from patients with
no known disorders of bone or calcium metabolism. Genotypes of
each line are given at the top.

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

151

3.4. The F hVDR isoform is more acti6e in transfected
cells

Although the above F/f groupings did not show a
rigorous association between hVDR genotype and fold-
induction by 1,25(OH)2D3 (Fig. 6A and C), recent
results from other laboratories (Arai et al., 1997; Colin
et al., 2000) have demonstrated an apparent higher
activity for the F isoform of hVDR relative to the f
isoform. The results presented in Fig. 6 are generally
consistent with this conclusion. In addition, Fig. 7A
depicts an in vitro experiment in which the F and f
hVDR isoforms were expressed from a pSG5-hVDR
construct and directly tested for transcriptional activity.
The original pSG5-hVDR vector expresses the F/M4
isoform; a cDNA insert expressing the f/M1 was engi-
neered into this same vector via site-directed mutagene-
sis [see Section 2 and (Jurutka et al., 2000)]. These two
vectors were separately transfected into the VDR-deﬁ-
cient rat osteosarcoma line, ROS 2/3, along with the
BGP-TKGH reporter plasmid. The results of this anal-
ysis (Fig. 7A) show a signiﬁcant (PB0.001) difference
in fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3, with the F hVDR
construct displaying a greater response to 1,25(OH)2D3
(4.2-fold) than the f allele construct (2.6-fold).

Fig. 7. Relative activities of F/M4 hVDR and f/M1 hVDR, expressed
from an engineered construct. (A) An f/M1 hVDR cDNA, differing
at the translational start site, was created from an existing F/M4
cDNA by site-directed mutagenesis. Both cDNAs, cloned in the
vector pSG5, were used to express F/M4 and f/M1 hVDRs in
VDR-deﬁcient ROS 2/3 cells (Jurutka et al., 2000). Assays for relative
transcriptional activity were performed as described above for en-
dogenous VDR in human ﬁbroblast cell lines, except that the BGP-
TKGH reporter vector was used (see Section 2). The results shown
(triplicate assays9S.E.M.) are representative of at least three inde-
pendent experiments. (B) Using the same cDNAs as in (A), 35S-la-
beled F/M4 and f/M1 hVDRs were expressed in a coupled in vitro
transcription/translation system (see Section 2) and assayed for their
ability to bind a human TFIIB-glutathione S-transferase fusion
protein that had been immobilized on Sepharose beads (Jurutka et
al., 2000). Washed beads were denatured and subjected to elec-
trophoresis on 5–15% SDS-PAGE gels (see Section 2), and 35S-la-
beled protein bands were visualized by autoradiography (left panel of
B). The right panel of B displays autoradiograms of 35S-labeled
proteins used for the pull-down assays (5% of total input).

Fig. 6. Correlation of transcriptional activity with hVDR genotype.
(A) All 20 cells lines are grouped by F/f genotype. Each grouping
consists of the indicated number of lines, and the fold-induction
values for these lines (taken from Fig. 5) are represented as the
average9S.E.M. (B) As in (A), but all 20 cell lines are grouped by
L/S genotype. (C; left panel) The ten cell lines with genotype LS are
grouped by F/f genotype, and the average fold-induction by
9S.E.M. is shown. (C; right panel) The seven lines with
1,25(OH)2D3
an LL genotype are similarly grouped by F/f genotype and plotted.
The three SS hVDR cell lines are omitted from this analysis, since
they do not form a complete set of F/f groupings ( ffSS is missing).
(D; left panel) The seven cell lines with genotype Ff are grouped by
L/S genotype. (D; right panel) The nine lines with a FF genotype are
similarly grouped by L/S genotype and plotted. The four ff cell lines
are omitted, as they do not form a complete set of L/S groupings
(again, ffSS is missing).

genetic variable in hVDR activity. Nevertheless, the FF
groupings show higher fold-inductions than the corre-
sponding Ff groups, with the exception of lines with the
SS hVDR genotype (see Fig. 6D), appearing to conﬁrm
an effect of the F/f polymorphism and suggesting that
the F allele is more active.

When 1,25(OH)2D3-stimulated transcription activities
in the twenty lines are grouped by L/S genotype (Fig.
6B), a much clearer, but still not statistically signiﬁcant,
trend emerges, with SS having the lowest fold-induc-
tion, LL possessing the highest, and the LS genotype
exhibiting intermediate activity. This trend persists
when the groupings are subdivided into those with
constant Ff or FF genotypic backgrounds (Fig. 6D),
leading to the tentative conclusion that the L hVDR
allele is more active than the S allele. The SS and ff
subsets were not included in Fig. 6C and Fig. 6D,
because of the low number of samples of both SS and
ff homozygotes (3 and 4, respectively), as well as the
complete lack of the ffSS hVDR genotype in the cur-
rent series of ﬁbroblasts lines.

152

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

3.5. Relati6e ability of F/f hVDR isoforms to interact
with TFIIB, in 6itro

It has earlier been reported by our group (Jurutka et
al., 2000) that F hVDR interacts more efﬁciently with
TFIIB than does the f hVDR isoform, thus providing a
plausible mechanism for the greater transactivation po-
tency of the F hVDR. Fig. 7B illustrates a typical
experiment, utilizing the GST pull-down technique to
compare the abilities of in vitro-synthesized, 35S-labeled
F/M4 and f/M1 hVDR isoreceptors to interact with an
immobilized TFIIB fusion protein. Even in the face of
a higher input of 35S-labeled f/M1 protein, the F/M4
protein shows a reproducibly greater (approximately
2-fold) ability to interact with TFIIB, when compared
with the f/M1 protein under the same conditions (Ju-
rutka et al., 2000). Whether this difference in activity
reﬂects that occurring under in vivo conditions is not
known; however, these results provide a reasonable
mechanism by which to explain the enhanced transacti-
vation ability of the F/M4 hVDR isoform, in vitro, and
are consistent with a proposed bioactivity for F hVDR
that is also greater than that of f hVDR, in vivo [(Gross
et al., 1996; Arai et al., 1997; Harris et al., 1997; Tao et
al., 1998; Videman et al., 1998; Correa et al., 1999;
Ferrari et al., 1999; Gennari et al., 1999; Kurabayashi
et al., 1999; Lucotte et al., 1999; Colin et al., 2000; Sosa
et al., 2000), see Section 4].

each increasing increment in allele score yielding a
higher average fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3. A quali-
tatively similar trend was seen if 1,25(OH)2D3-stimu-
lated values for reporter gene production were plotted
instead of
fold-induction values (data not shown).
Thus, the dramatic escalation of hVDR functional ac-
tivity appears to correlate to the combined hVDR
genotypic allele score at the F/f and L/S loci. Impor-
tantly, the difference between the two groups with allele
scores of 2 and 4 achieves statistical signiﬁcance by the
two-tailed Student’s t-test (P=0.035).

Fig. 8B depicts the identical data set analyzed in A,
but with each cell line plotted as an individual point.
When a linear regression line is calculated for all 20
lines, the allele score shows a moderately strong, and
statistically signiﬁcant, positive correlation with trans-
activation (correlation coefﬁcient=0.595; P=0.012).
If, however, the cell lines are divided into a high group
(above the n=20 regression line) and low group (below
the n=20 line), the respective correlation coefﬁcients
are markedly improved, to 0.958 for the high group
(n=8, P B0.001) and 0.858 for the low group (n=12,
PB0.001). This apparent segregation of values into
high and low groups argues for the existence of a new,
third variable, other than the Fok I or 3% cluster of
polymorphisms containing L/S, in determining hVDR
functional activity.

3.6. Correlation between genotype at both polymorphic
loci and transacti6ation by endogenous VDRs

4. Discussion

Considering the lack of genetic linkage between the
Fok I and L/S polymorphisms (Gross et al., 1996;
Ferrari et al., 1998; Cheng and Tsai, 1999), plus the fact
that both loci appear to affect function of the endoge-
nous receptor,
in vivo (Fig. 6), as well as evidence
indicating that F hVDR is more active than f, in vitro,
we attempted next to correlate the combined genotypes
at both loci with hVDR transactivation ability. In order
to condense genotypic information from both sites into
a single variable, an ‘allele score’ was devised based on
which allelic variants appear more active in the litera-
ture and in the present experiments. Since the F geno-
type is more active than f both in vivo and in vitro,
each F hVDR allele was assigned a value of 1, while f
alleles were scored as zero. Likewise, because the data
in Fig. 6, panels B and D, indicate the L hVDR alleles
to be more active than the S alleles, L and S alleles
received scores of 1 and 0, respectively. Since the hVDR
gene resides on an autosome (chromosome 12) (Szpirer
et al., 1991), possible total allele scores range from 0 to
4 for both sexes. After grouping all twenty cell lines
according to this formula, the average fold-induction
by 1,25(OH)2D3 was plotted versus the allele score (Fig.
8A). A striking trend emerges from this analysis, with

A goal of the present study was to examine endoge-
nous hVDR transcriptional activity in relation to
hVDR genotype at unlinked polymorphic sites in both
exons II and IX. The results reveal a strong correlation
between genotype and VDR activity that emerges when
both polymorphic sites are simultaneously considered
(Fig. 8). A corollary of this conclusion is that variation
at both polymorphic sites is important to hVDR func-
tional activity, in vivo, but that considering each site
separately may not reveal signiﬁcant effects. Thus, the
current data may explain why many attempts to corre-
late hVDR activity with genotype at a single locus have
been unsuccessful.

The allelic distributions found in the present sample
are similar to genotype frequencies in the published
literature. The 62.5% frequency reported here for the F
allele is comparable to the 63.5% published for Italian
women (Gennari et al., 1999), the 62% for French
women (Eccleshall et al., 1998) and the 61% for Mexi-
can-American Caucasian women (Gross et al., 1996),
but lower than the incidences of the F allele (68.5%)
observed for Japanese women (Arai et al., 1997), or the
80.5% reported for African-American women (Harris et
al., 1997). Concerning the singlet(A) L/S alleles, the
frequency of the L allele in the present sample, 60%,

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

153

Fig. 8. Correlation of transcriptional activity with hVDR genotype at both L/S and F/f loci. (A) Results from Fig. 5 were grouped according to
an ‘allele score’, computed as the sum of F and L alleles in each cell line. As indicated earlier, no cell lines with the ffSS hVDR genotype are
included in the cell lines studied; hence, no cell line with a score of zero could be evaluated. The average of the group with a score of two is
signiﬁcantly different from the average of the group with a score of 4 (P=0.035) as assessed by the two-tailed Student’s t-test. (B) The data from
(A) were plotted as individual points instead of the average of each group, with each point representing a single cell line. The linear regression
ﬁt for all 20 points is represented by a dotted line. The regression line for an apparent ‘high’ group (	, n=8) is shown as a dashed line, while
the remaining lines appear to form a ‘low’ group (, n=12), with its regression ﬁt illustrated as a solid line.

again resembles published results for Caucasians (59%),
but is less than that noted for Hispanics (69%), African-
Americans (71%), Japanese-Americans (91%), and Chi-
nese (91%) (Ingles et al., 1997a).

The assignment of F as the more active hVDR allele
is based not only on the current analysis of ﬁbroblast
lines, but also on in vitro data collected with F and f
proteins expressed in transfected cells [Fig. 7 and (Arai
et al., 1997; Jurutka et al., 2000)]. Another group (Colin
et al., 2000) has also studied F versus f hVDR proteins,
and reported a lower ED50 for 1,25(OH)2D3 with the F
allele. These data indicating a more active F hVDR
allele are consistent with a number of epidemiological
studies which suggest that the F allele, when compared
with the f allele,
is associated with increased BMD
(Gross et al., 1996; Arai et al., 1997; Harris et al., 1997;
Tao et al., 1998; Ferrari et al., 1999; Lucotte et al.,
1999), higher rates of bone turnover (Kurabayashi et
al., 1999), lower risk for primary hyperparathyroidism
(Correa et al., 1999; Sosa et al., 2000), lower risk for
intervertebral disc degeneration (Videman et al., 1998)
and lower incidence of vertebral fracture (Gennari et
al., 1999). However, it should be acknowledged that not
all studies have found these associations. For instance,
one group (Eccleshall et al., 1998) did not observe a
correlation between hVDR genotype and BMD in a
large cohort of French women. Also, another group
(Gross et al., 1998) was unable to correlate any hVDR-
related functional parameter with F/f genotype in either
cells transfected with vectors expressing F versus f
hVDRs, or in a small panel of human ﬁbroblast lines,
although perhaps because of methodological
limita-

tions, small differences in activity may have escaped
detection. Additionally, as discussed above, the fact
that only the F/f genotype was considered in the above
investigations implies that the L/S genotype could have
been a signiﬁcant confounder in these studies.

The assignment of L hVDR as more active than S is
based exclusively on observations with the present
panel of ﬁbroblast cell lines. L and S hVDR alleles do
not produce different proteins, and, therefore, cannot
be tested in the same fashion as F/f isoforms. As a
provocative test of this assignment, we instead enter-
tained the alternative hypothesis that S hVDR alleles
are more active, and replotted the data in Fig. 8A.
However, the plot of this modiﬁed allele score (F+S)
versus transcriptional activity appeared to show an
inverse correlation between hVDR allele score and
bioactivity (data not shown). This exercise, plus the
present data (Fig. 6 and Fig. 8), strongly support the
premise that L is the more active hVDR allele. Since
this polymorphism occurs in exon IX, but is expressed
only in the 3% UTR of hVDR mRNA, the working
hypothesis presented herein states that the L allele may
produce receptor mRNA that is more stable and/or is
translated more efﬁciently into hVDR protein than the
S allele.

Pertinent to the hypothesis above, the mRNA stabil-
ities of allelic variants in or adjacent to exon IX [i.e.,
considering one or more sites in the Bsm/Taq/Apa/sin-
glet(A) cluster] have been evaluated in recent studies
using various
(Morrison et al., 1994;
Mocharla et al., 1997; Verbeek et al., 1997; Carling et
al., 1998; Gross et al., 1998; Durrin et al., 1999).

strategies

154

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

investigations,

Mirroring the epidemiological
these
studies have yielded conﬂicting results. In one set of
experiments (Verbeek et al., 1997),
lymphocytes het-
erozygous for the Taq polymorphism were examined. It
was found that, whereas mRNA stabilities were similar
for both alleles, the mRNA from the t allele (linked to
S) was consistently 30% less abundant. This result was
interpreted as suggesting a possible difference in tran-
scriptional regulation between the two allelic forms
studied, although no mechanism for this effect was
proposed (Verbeek et al., 1997). In contrast, another
study (Carling et al., 1998) examining pituitary ade-
nomas from 42 patients showed that B and t alleles
were associated with higher hVDR mRNA levels,
reaching statistical signiﬁcance when homozygous BB
or tt lines were compared with bb or TT homozygotes.
Results similar to those of Carling et al. were obtained
by others (Morrison et al., 1994), using a heterologous
system in which 3.2 kb of 3% UTR from two subjects
homozygous for either BAtS or baTL were linked to a
luciferase reporter gene. In transfected COS-7 cells, the
BAtS construct displayed higher luciferase activity, sug-
gesting to these authors that either transcriptional ac-
tivity of the construct itself, or mRNA stability of its
transcript, were more favorably affected by attachment
of the BAtS as opposed to the baTL 3% UTR (Morrison
et al., 1994). Finally, three further groups reported no
signiﬁcant effect of 3% UTR allelic variants on hVDR
mRNA. These studies examined B versus b mRNA
abundance in blood monocytes (Mocharla et al., 1997),
B versus b hVDR protein and mRNA abundance in
cultured skin ﬁbroblasts (Gross et al., 1998), and stabil-
ity of globin mRNAs attached to L or S 3% UTRs in
transfected NIH3T3 cells (Durrin et al., 1999). In par-
ticular, the last study, in which methodology similar to
that of Morrison et al. was used, strongly suggests that
the baTL and BAtS 3% UTRs do not confer different
mRNA stabilities, at least when attached to a het-
erologous (rabbit b globin) mRNA (Durrin et al.,
1999).

Drawing conclusions from the above investigations
with respect to the L/S polymorphism must be done
cautiously, since only two of the six studies cited above
(Morrison et al., 1994; Durrin et al., 1999) actually
determined L/S genotype in their subjects. Neverthe-
less, given the reasonably tight linkage between Bsm I
and singlet(A) polymorphisms (Ingles et al., 1997a), the
above discussed results, when taken together, do sug-
gest that mRNA stability may not be a major mecha-
nism distinguishing the activity of L versus S alleles.
The possibility remains, however, that the L allele in
some fashion produces more VDR protein from a given
unit of mRNA. While there is a paucity of data to
support or refute such a conclusion, it is notable that
ligand binding assays (Gross et al., 1998) seem to
indicate a trend toward higher VDR abundance (ex-

not

these

differences were

pressed as Nmax) in bb versus BB ﬁbroblast lines, al-
though
statistically
signiﬁcant. Should it be the case that L alleles (linked to
b) produce more hVDR protein, what could be the
mechanism for such an effect? Recent observations
regarding mammalian and yeast poly(A) binding
proteins (PABPs) indicate that binding of PABP to
mRNA enhances translatability of mRNAs via an in-
teraction with other proteins that interact with the 5%
end of the message (Munroe and Jacobson, 1990; Le et
al., 1997). Usually, multiple PABP monomers bind to
poly(A)+ RNAs, with each monomer occupying ap-
proximately 27 adenylate residues (Baer and Kornberg,
1980). Intriguingly, further studies with human PABP
suggest that as few as 11 consecutive A’s can bind to
PABP, with 25 A’s giving maximum afﬁnity (Deo et al.,
1999). Thus, one could speculate that: (a) PABP may be
capable of binding to the singlet(A) repeat in the hVDR
gene; and (b) its ability to bind may be enhanced in
long (L) alleles (17–24 A’s) versus short (S) alleles
(10–15 A’s). Greater association of PABP with L alle-
les would then lead to more efﬁcacious translation via a
more potent interaction with translation factors such as
EF-4B (Le et al., 1997).

a

using

1,25(OH)2D3-responsive

Regardless of the potential mechanism, the endoge-
nous VDR activities, as measured in the present experi-
ments
reporter
plasmid, showed a surprising range of activities, from
1.75- to 100-fold induction by 1,25(OH)2D3 It is as-
serted that the current results are valid when comparing
cell lines within the studied group, particularly because
the data were normalized for transfection efﬁciency as
monitored by inclusion of an expression plasmid for
b-galactosidase. It is possible, nonetheless, that the
presence of four closely-spaced vitamin D responsive
elements in the (CT4)4TKGH reporter construct used
could exaggerate small differences in activity that may
be much more subtle under in vivo conditions, espe-
cially considering that natural promoters often possess
a single, or at most, two vitamin D responsive elements
(Haussler et al., 1998). Indeed, the results with the
BGP-TKGH, which contains a single VDRE element,
revealed more modest transactivation levels in trans-
fected cells (see Fig. 7A) and a less dramatic difference
between F versus f hVDR activity.

The absence in the current sample set of a cell line
with an allele score of zero (i.e. ffSS) is notable because
it did not allow an evaluation of the activity of this
genotype. The obvious explanation for this absence is
the fact that, since hVDR ff and SS homozygotes are
relatively uncommon among Caucasians (19 and 15%,
respectively), the combination of ffSS would, therefore,
represent a rare genotype (estimated frequency about
3% in Caucasians). Given the observed correlation be-
tween allele score and fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3
(Fig. 8B), it is predicted that cells with this genotype

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

155

would have very low relative transcriptional activity. A
recent epidemiological study (Hutchinson et al., 2000),
in which a large cohort with malignant melanoma was
genotyped at the T/t and F/f loci, supports this conclu-
sion. It was found that fftt (recall that t is often linked
to S) had signiﬁcantly thicker tumors (P=0.001).
These results intimate that the fftt allele combination
might be associated with less active hVDR, as VDR has
been reported to have antiproliferative effects that
might be expected to counter the malignant phenotype
(Haussler et al., 1998). Clearly, more ﬁbroblast lines
must be examined to answer these questions, and it will
be interesting to determine if ffSS hVDR cell
lines
actually possess very low hVDR activity. Should this be
the case, the provocative possibility could be raised that
this rare ffSS hVDR genotype might be so disadvanta-
geous with respect to calcium and bone metabolism
that it has been sharply reduced in the gene pool.

The two ﬁbroblast lines in the present panel from
patients with William’s Syndrome exhibited very differ-
ent hVDR activities, with the endogenous VDR in the
DWF-CV line displaying extremely high (100-fold) in-
duction by 1,25(OH)2D3, and the DWF-TW line dis-
playing near-average activity (23-fold induction). The
extremely high activity of the DWF-CV line (three
standard deviations above the mean of 28924 fold-in-
duction) suggests a possible association with the hyper-
calcemia often seen in patients with William’s
Syndrome. However, because the great majority of
William’s Syndrome cases involve a chromosomal dele-
tion at 7q11.23 (Ewart et al., 1993), and the hVDR
gene resides on chromosome 12, this syndrome would
appear to be unrelated to VDR action (as seems to be
the case with patient DWF-TW). However, it is con-
ceivable that patient DWF-CV, whose ﬁbroblasts ex-
hibit extremely elevated VDR activity, may represent
an atypical William’s case that does involve increased
sensitivity to 1,25(OH)2D3, a mechanism that has al-
ready been speculated for isolated cases resembling
Williams’s Syndrome (Ghirri et al., 1999).

Concerning the three osteoporotic patients in the
current sample set, two ﬁbroblast lines showed normal
hVDR activity, but a third (Ran Nor, from a 69-year-
old male) displayed very low induction of the reporter
gene (6.2-fold versus the average of 28-fold). The low
activity of hVDR in the Ran Nor cell sample could, in
theory, be related to the low bone density of osteoporo-
sis. However, osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease
and, therefore, a very large study would be required to
test any relationship between its etiology and hVDR
alleles.

The lowest induction of the tested reporter construct
by 1,25(OH)2D3 (1.75-fold) was observed in the trans-
fected cell line HS 144.We, taken from a 5-week-old
embryo. These cells represent one of two prenatal cell
lines in the present panel; thus, one possible explana-

tion for the very low hVDR activity is that cells from
this early gestational stage may not yet be differentiated
sufﬁciently to express VDR at levels seen postnatally.
However, the other fetal cell line, HE-SK (exact fetal
age unknown), displayed a slightly above average in-
duction of 35.4-fold. Further arguing against the above
interpretation is the observation from this laboratory
that, with the exception of tissues like intestine that are
phenotypically responsive to vitamin D in the adult,
VDR expression has actually been shown to diminish in
rat and chick tissues such as muscle and liver when they
mature beyond the embryonic stage (M.R. Haussler
and K. Yamaoka, unpublished data). Other groups
have also observed VDR expression in various embry-
onic and fetal tissues (Takeuchi et al., 1994; Johnson et
al., 1995; Delvin et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 1996;
Veenstra et al., 1998; Segura et al., 1999). Finally, given
that the HS 144.We line has an allele score of 1
(genotype FfSS),
its observed fold-induction of 1.75
resides between a predicted value of 5.3-fold stimula-
tion by 1,25(OH)2D3 using the regression line for all 19
other lines, and a prediction of negligible stimulation
(i.e. close to 1.0-fold) for the ‘low group’ regression line
(both values calculated from plots similar to that of
Fig. 8B, but omitting the HS 144.We data point). Thus,
the observed HS 144.We hVDR transcriptional activity
is not outside the predicted range for its allele score.
Regardless, the data do not rule out early developmen-
tal-stage variations in human VDR expression, a topic
that deserves further study.

The presence of two distinct groupings of hVDR
activity versus allele score at the F/f plus L/S loci in
Fig. 8B argues in favor of the existence of another
variable that inﬂuences innate hVDR activity, at least
in ﬁbroblasts. There are a number of potential variables
to consider, including such parameters as age and sex
of the patients from whom the cells were taken. An
analysis of these variables in the current sample set
reveals that, although the gender distribution between
the high and low groups of Fig. 8B is similar (60 and
50% male, respectively), the average age is somewhat
higher in the low group, but this difference is without
statistical signiﬁcance (20.9 versus 4.8 years, P=0.11).
Thus, based on the current data, it is contended that
age and sex of the cell donors would not be satisfactory
explanations for the existence of a high and a low
activity group.

Instead, the hypothesis put forth in the present com-
munication (Fig. 9) is that there exists one or more
additional polymorphic variations in the hVDR gene
beyond those at the F/f locus and in the 3% cluster
(Apa/Bsm/Taq and L/S) that affect(s) hVDR activity.
The coding exons of the hVDR gene have been studied
rather extensively, and have yielded numerous point
mutations causing hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets
(Hawa et al., 1996; Lin et al., 1996; Whitﬁeld et al.,

156

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

1996; Haussler et al., 1998), but no evidence has been
presented for the occurrence of common polymorphic
sites other than the Fok I site in exon II and the linked
cluster of sites in the exon VIII–IX region. Yet recent
investigations into the portion of the hVDR gene en-
coding the 5% untranslated region (5% UTR) have re-
vealed a surprising complex of at least seven exons
(denoted IA-IG, see Fig. 9, top left), with evidence for
alternative splicing (Miyamoto et al., 1997; Crofts et
al., 1998). It is possible that undiscovered common
polymorphic sites may exist in this newly described
complex of multiple exons at the 5% end of the gene.
Such polymorphisms could even alter VDR protein
structure by introducing in-frame initiator methionine
codons leading to the expression of VDRs with N-ter-
minal extensions, as already proposed by one research
group (Crofts et al., 1998).

Still another possibility is that polymorphisms in the
5% region of the VDR gene might affect the activity of
one of the three proposed hVDR promoters (Crofts et
al., 1998), leading to the expression of altered quantities
of VDR proteins under physiologic conditions. Here
again, a precedent exists from a recent report (Arai et
al., 1999 J. Bone Miner. Res. 14, S191, Abstract T084),
which describes a polymorphism in a binding site for

Cdx-2, a homeodomain protein related to caudal (posi-
tion of Cdx binding site in the hVDR gene is shown in
Fig. 9, top left). The importance of Cdx-2 for intestine-
speciﬁc expression of hVDR was demonstrated earlier
(Yamamoto et al., 1999). It is, of course, not possible to
invoke this polymorphism to explain the present results
in ﬁbroblast lines, given the intestine-speciﬁc nature of
Cdx-2 regulated expression (Suh et al., 1994). However,
the existence of this polymorphism should certainly be
considered in epidemiological studies relating VDR-me-
diated intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate
as they impact BMD and parathyroid gland function.
Indeed, in a large cohort of Japanese women, the A
allele at the Cdx-2 locus correlated with higher BMD in
the lumbar spine, consistent with a slightly greater
activity of a VDR promoter construct incorporating the
Cdx-A type element (Arai et al., 1999, J. Bone Miner.
Res. 14, S191, Abstract T084).

Rather than evoking Cdx-2 or any other known
polymorphism to explain the present results, we prefer
the interpretation that a novel polymorphism exists,
likely located in the incompletely characterized 5% re-
gion of the hVDR gene. A full recognition of the
genetic complexity of VDR action in humans may
eventually allow for accurate prediction of VDR activ-

Fig. 9. Summary of common polymorphic variations in the hVDR gene that may inﬂuence VDR activity. The exon arrangement (top) is described
in Fig. 2 and the associated text. The long (L) variant of the singlet(A) repeat in exon IX is proposed herein to be associated with increased VDR
amount. A speculative mechanism for this effect is the enhanced ability of ]17 consecutive As to recruit poly(A) binding protein, which would
presumably stabilize VDR mRNA and/or promote its translation into hVDR protein (see text). The F/f polymorphism in exon II has likewise
been shown to be associated with VDR activity, with the F isoform displaying both moderately higher transcriptional activity, as well as
measurably greater interaction, in vitro, with TFIIB (Jurutka et al., 2000). Recently, a third hVDR polymorphism has been described upstream
of exon IG in a binding site for the intestine-speciﬁc enhancer protein Cdx-2 (Arai et al., 1999, J. Bone Miner. Res. 14, S191, Abstract T084). This
polymorphism may be signiﬁcant for its effects on hVDR expression in intestinal cells (Yamamoto et al., 1999). All three of the illustrated
polymorphisms are proposed to affect either the quantity of expressed VDR in human tissues (Cdx-2 and L/S), or the ability of VDR to interact
with other proteins such as TFIIB (F/f, as illustrated at bottom right), in order to impact the transcription of target genes. Finally, it is suggested
that other functionally relevant VDR gene polymorphisms may exist, especially in the recently-described complex of exons encoding the 5%-UTR.

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

157

ity in individual patients based on genotype, along with
an enhanced ability to assess disease risk, as well as
response to pharmacologic agents related to VDR
action.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by National Institutes of

Health grants to Mark R. Haussler.

References

Arai, H., Miyamoto, K.-I., Taketani, Y., Yamamoto, H., Iemori, Y.,
Morita, K., Tonai, T., Nishisho, T., Mori, S., Takeda, E., 1997. A
vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism in the translation initia-
tion codon: effect on protein activity and relation to bone mineral
density in Japanese women. J. Bone Miner. Res. 12, 915–921.

Baer, B.W., Kornberg, R.D., 1980. Repeating structure of cytoplas-
mic poly(A)-ribonucleoprotein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77,
1890–1892.

Baker, A.R., McDonnell, D.P., Hughes, M.R., Crisp, T.M., Mangels-
dorf, D.J., Haussler, M.R., Pike, J.W., Shine, J., O’Malley, B.W.,
1988. Cloning and expression of full-length cDNA encoding hu-
man vitamin D receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 3294–
3298.

Baniahmad, A., Ha, I., Reinberg, D., Tsai, S., Tsai, M.-J., O’Malley,
B.W., 1993. Interaction of human thyroid-hormone receptor-beta
with transcription factor TFIIB may mediate target gene derepres-
sion and activation by thyroid-hormone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 90, 8832–8836.

Carling, T., Rastad, J., Akerstrom, G., Westin, G., 1998. Vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and parathyroid hormone messenger ribonucleic
acid levels correspond to polymorphic VDR alleles in human
parathyroid tumors. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 83, 2255–2259.
Cheng, W.C., Tsai, K.S., 1999. The vitamin D receptor start codon
polymorphism (Fok1) and bone mineral density in premenopausal
women in Taiwan. Osteoporosis Int. 9, 545–549.

Colin, E.M., Weel, A.E., Uitterlinden, A.G., Buurman, C.J., Birken-
hager, J.C., Pols, H.A., Van Leeuwen, J.P., 2000. Consequences
of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms for growth inhibition
of cultured human peripheral blood mononuclear cells by 1,25-di-
hydroxyvitamin D3. Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxford) 52, 211–216.

Correa, P., Rastad, J., Schwarz, P., Westin, G., Kindmark, A.,
Lundgren, E., Akerstrom, G., Carling, T., 1999. The vitamin D
receptor (VDR) start codon polymorphism in primary hyper-
parathyroidism and parathyroid VDR messenger ribonucleic acid
levels. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84, 1690–1694.

Crofts, L.A., Hancock, M.S., Morrison, N.A., Eisman, J.A., 1998.
Multiple promoters direct the tissue-speciﬁc expression of novel
N-terminal variant human vitamin D receptor gene transcripts.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 10529–10534.

Curran, J.E., Vaughan, T., Lea, R.A., Weinstein, S.R., Morrison,
N.A., Grifﬁths, L.R., 1999. Association of a vitamin D receptor
polymorphism with sporadic breast cancer development. Int. J.
Cancer 83, 723–726.

Delvin, E.E., Lopez, V., Levy, E., Menard, D., 1996. Calcitriol
differentially modulates mRNA encoding calcitriol receptors and
calcium-binding protein 9 kDa in human fetal jejunum. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 224, 544–548.

Deo, R.C., Bonanno, J.B., Sonenberg, N., Burley, S.K., 1999. Recog-
nition of polyadenylate RNA by the poly(A)-binding protein. Cell
98, 835–845.

Durrin, L.K., Haile, R.W., Ingles, S.A., Coetzee, G.A., 1999. Vitamin
D receptor 3%-untranslated region polymorphisms: lack of effect
on mRNA stability. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1453, 311–320.

Eccleshall, T.R., Garnero, P., Gross, C., Delmas, P.D., Feldman, D.,
1998. Lack of correlation between start codon polymorphism of
the vitamin D receptor gene and bone mineral density in pre-
menopausal French women: the OFELY study. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 13, 31–35.

Ewart, A.K., Morris, C.A., Atkinson, D., Jin, W., Sternes, K.,
Spallone, P., Stock, A.D., Leppert, M., Keating, M.T., 1993.
Hemizygosity at the elastin locus in a developmental disorder,
Williams syndrome. Nat. Genet. 5, 11–16.

Faraco, J.H., Morrison, N.A., Baker, A., Shine, J., Frossard, P.M.,
1989. ApaI dimorphism at the human vitamin D receptor gene
locus. Nucl. Acids Res. 17, 2150.

Ferrari, S., Rizzoli, R., Manen, D., Slosman, D., Bonjour, J.P., 1998.
Vitamin D receptor gene start codon polymorphisms (Fok I) and
bone mineral density: interaction with age, dietary calcium, and
3%-end region polymorphisms. J. Bone Miner. Res. 13, 925–930.
Ferrari, S., Manen, D., Bonjour, J.P., Slosman, D., Rizzoli, R., 1999.
Bone mineral mass and calcium and phosphate metabolism in
young men: relationships with vitamin D receptor allelic polymor-
phisms. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84, 2043–2048.

Gennari, L., Becherini, L., Mansani, R., Masi, L., Falchetti, A.,
Morelli, A., Colli, E., Gonnelli, S., Cepollaro, C., Brandi, M.L.,
1999. Fok I polymorphism at translation initiation site of the
vitamin D receptor gene predicts bone mineral density and verte-
bral fractures in postmenopausal Italian women. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 14, 1379–1386.

Ghirri, P., Bottone, U., Coccoli, L., Bernardini, M., Vuerich, M.,
Cuttano, A., Riparbelli, C., Pellegrinetti, G., Boldrini, A., 1999.
Symptomatic hypercalcemia in the ﬁrst months of life: calcium-
regulating hormones and treatment. J Endocrinol. Invest. 22,
349–353.

Gill, R.K., Atkins, L.M., Hollis, B.W., Bell, N.H., 1998. Mapping the
domains of the interaction of the vitamin D receptor and steroid
receptor coactivator-1. Mol. Endocrinol. 12, 57–65.

Gross, C., Eccleshall, T.R., Malloy, P.J., Villa, M.L., Marcus, R.,
Feldman, D., 1996. The presence of a polymorphism at the
translation initiation site of the vitamin D receptor gene is associ-
ated with low bone mineral density in postmenopausal Mexican-
American women. J. Bone Miner. Res. 11, 1850–1855.

Gross, C., Krishnan, A.V., Malloy, P.J., Eccleshall, T.R., Zhao,
X.Y., Feldman, D., 1998. The vitamin D receptor gene start
codon polymorphism: a functional analysis of Fok I variants. J.
Bone Miner. Res. 13, 1691–1699.

Harris, S.S., Eccleshall, T.R., Gross, C., Dawson-Hughes, B., Feld-
man, D., 1997. The vitamin D receptor start codon polymorphism
(Fok I) and bone mineral density in premenopausal American
black and white women. J. Bone Miner. Res. 12, 1043–1048.

Haussler, M.R., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Haussler, C.A., Hsieh, J.-C.,
Thompson, P.D., Selznick, S.H., Encinas Dominguez, C., Ju-
rutka, P.W., 1998. The nuclear vitamin D receptor: biological and
molecular regulatory properties revealed. J. Bone Miner. Res. 13,
325–349.

Hawa, N.S., Cockerill, F.J., Vadher, S., Hewison, M., Rut, A.K.,
Pike, J.W., O’Riordan, J.L., Farrow, S.M., 1996. Identiﬁcation of
a novel mutation in hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets causing
exon skipping. Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf) 45, 85–92.

Hsieh, J.-C., Jurutka, P.W., Galligan, M.A., Terpening, C.M., Haus-
sler, C.A., Samuels, D.S., Shimizu, Y., Shimizu, N., Haussler,
M.R., 1991. Human vitamin D receptor is selectively phosphory-
lated by protein kinase C on serine 51, a residue crucial to its
trans-activation function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 9315–
9319.

Hsieh, J.-C., Jurutka, P.W., Selznick, S.H., Reeder, M.C., Haussler,
C.A., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Haussler, M.R., 1995. The T-box near the

158

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

zinc ﬁngers of the human vitamin D receptor is required for
heterodimeric DNA binding and transactivation. Biochem. Bio-
phys. Res. Commun. 215, 1–7.

Hsieh, J.-C., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Oza, A.K., Dang, H.T.L., Price, J.N.,
Galligan, M.A., Jurutka, P.W., Thompson, P.D., Haussler, C.A.,
Haussler, M.R., 1999. Characterization of unique DNA binding
and transcriptional activation functions in the carboxyl-terminal
extension of the zinc ﬁnger region in the human vitamin D
receptor. Biochemistry 38, 16347–16358.

Hutchinson, P.E., Osborne, J.E., Lear, J.T., Smith, A.G., Bowers,
P.W., Morris, P.N., Jones, P.W., York, C., Strange, R.C., Fryer,
A.A., 2000. Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms are associated
with altered prognosis in patients with malignant melanoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 6, 498–504.

Ingles, S.A., Haile, R.W., Henderson, B.E., Kolonel, L.N., Nakaichi,
G., Shi, C.Y., Yu, M.C., Ross, R.K., Coetzee, G.A., 1997a.
Strength of linkage disequilibrium between two vitamin D recep-
tor markers in ﬁve ethnic groups:
implications for association
studies. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 6, 93–98.

Ingles, S.A., Ross, R.K., Yu, M.C., Irvine, R.A., La Pera, G., Haile,
R.W., Coetzee, G.A., 1997b. Association of prostate cancer risk
with genetic polymorphisms in vitamin D receptor and androgen
receptor. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 89, 166–170.

Ingles, S.A., Haile, R., Henderson, B., Kolonel, L., Coetzee, G.,
1997c. Association of vitamin D receptor genetic polymorphism
with breast cancer risk in African-American and Hispanic women.
In: Norman, A.W., et al. (Eds.), Vitamin D: Chemistry, Biology
and Clinical Applications of the Steroid Hormone. University of
California, Printing and Reprographics, Riverside, pp. 813–814.
Johnson, J.A., Grande, J.P., Roche, P.C., Sweeney, W.E. Jr, Avner,
E.D., Kumar, R., 1995. 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor on-
togenesis in fetal renal development. Am. J. Physiol. 269, F419–
428.

Johnson, J.A., Grande, J.P., Roche, P.C., Kumar, R., 1996. On-
togeny of the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor in fetal rat bone.
J. Bone Miner. Res. 11, 56–61.

Jurutka, P.W., Hsieh, J.-C., Remus, L.S., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Thomp-
son, P.D., Haussler, C.A., Blanco, J.C.G., Ozato, K., Haussler,
M.R., 1997. Mutations in the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor
identifying C-terminal amino acids required for transcriptional
activation that are functionally dissociated from hormone bind-
ing, heterodimeric DNA binding and interaction with basal tran-
scription factor IIB, in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 14592–14599.
Jurutka, P.W., Remus, L.S., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Thompson, P.D.,
Hsieh, J.C., Zitzer, H., Tavakkoli, P., Galligan, M.A., Dang,
H.T.L., Haussler, C.A., Haussler, M.R., 2000. The polymorphic
N terminus in human vitamin D receptor isoforms inﬂuences
transcriptional activity by modulating interaction with transcrip-
tion factor IIB. Mol. Endocrinol. 14, 401–420.

Jurutka, P.W., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Hsieh, J.-C., Thompson, P.D., Haus-
sler, C.A., Haussler, M.R., 2001. Molecular nature of the vitamin
D receptor and its role in regulation of gene expression. Rev.
Endocrinol. Met. Disorders, 2, 203–216.

Kato, S., Takeyama, K., Kitanaka, S., Murayama, A., Sekine, K.,
Yoshizawa, T., 1999. In vivo function of VDR in gene expression-
VDR knock-out mice. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 69, 247–
251.

Kraichely, D.M., Collins, J.J. III, DeLisle, R.K., MacDonald, P.N.,
1999. The autonomous transactivation domain in helix H3 of the
vitamin D receptor is required for transactivation and coactivator
interaction. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 14352–14358.

Kurabayashi, T., Tomita, M., Matsushita, H., Yahata, T., Honda,
A., Takakuwa, K., Tanaka, K., 1999. Association of vitamin D
and estrogen receptor gene polymorphism with the effect of
hormone replacement
therapy on bone mineral density in
Japanese women. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 180, 1115–1120.

Le, H., Tanguay, R.L., Balasta, M.L., Wei, C.C., Browning, K.S.,
Metz, A.M., Goss, D.J., Gallie, D.R., 1997. Translation initiation
factors eIF-iso4G and eIF-4B interact with the poly(A)-binding
protein and increase its RNA binding activity. J. Biol. Chem. 272,
16247–16255.

Li, Y.C., Amling, M., Pirro, A.E., Priemel, M., Meuse, J., Baron, R.,
Delling, G., Demay, M.B., 1998. Normalization of mineral ion
homeostasis by dietary means prevents hyperparathyroidism, rick-
ets, and osteomalacia, but not alopecia in vitamin D receptor-ab-
lated mice. Endocrinology 139, 4391–4396.

Lin, N.U.-T., Malloy, P.J., Sakati, N., Al-Ashwal, A., Feldman, D.,
1996. A novel mutation in the deoxyribonucleic acid-binding
domain of the vitamin D receptor causes hereditary 1,25-dihy-
droxyvitamin D-resistant rickets. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 81,
2564–2569.

Lucotte, G., Mercier, G., Burckel, A., 1999. The vitamin D receptor
FokI start codon polymorphism and bone mineral density in
osteoporotic postmenopausal French women. Clin. Genet. 56,
221–224.

Miyamoto, K.-i., Kesterson, R.A., Yamamoto, H., Taketani, Y.,
Nishiwaki, E., Tatsumi, S., Inoue, Y., Morita, K., Takeda, E.,
Pike, J.W., 1997. Structural organization of the human vitamin D
receptor chromosomal gene and its promoter. Mol. Endocrinol.
11, 1165–1179.

Mocharla, H., Butch, A.W., Pappas, A.A., Flick, J.T., Weinstein,
R.S., De Togni, P., Jilka, R.L., Roberson, P.K., Parﬁtt, A.M.,
Manolagas, S.C., 1997. Quantiﬁcation of vitamin D receptor
mRNA by competitive polymerase chain reaction in PBMC: lack
of correspondence with common allelic variants. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 12, 726–733.

Morrison, N.A., Yeoman, R., Kelly, P.J., Eisman, J.A., 1992. Contri-
bution of trans-acting factor alleles to normal physiological vari-
ability: vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms and circulating
osteocalcin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 6665–6669.

Morrison, N.A., Qi, J.C., Tokita, A., Kelly, P.J., Crofts, L., Nguyen,
T.V., Sambrook, P.N., Eisman, J.A., 1994. Prediction of bone
density from vitamin D receptor alleles. Nature 367, 284–287.

Munroe, D., Jacobson, A., 1990. Tales of poly(A): a review. Gene 91,

151–158.

Nakajima, S., Hsieh, J.-C., MacDonald, P.N., Galligan, M.A., Haus-
sler, C.A., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Haussler, M.R., 1994. The C-terminal
region of the vitamin D receptor is essential to form a complex
with a receptor auxiliary factor required for high afﬁnity binding
to the vitamin D responsive element. Mol. Endocrinol. 8, 159–
172.

Niimi, T., Tomita, H., Sato, S., Kawaguchi, H., Akita, K., Maeda,
H., Sugiura, Y., Ueda, R., 1999. Vitamin D receptor gene poly-
morphism in patients with sarcoidosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care
Med. 160, 1107–1109.

Rachez, C., Lemon, B.D., Suldan, Z., Bromleigh, V., Gamble, M.,
Naar, A.M., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., Freedman,
L.P., 1999. Ligand-dependent transcription activation by nuclear
receptors requires the DRIP complex. Nature 398, 824–828.

Renaud, J.-P., Rochel, N., Ruff, M., Vivat, V., Chambon, P., Grone-
meyer, H., Moras, D., 1995. Crystal structure of the RAR-g
ligand-binding domain bound to all-trans retinoic acid. Nature
378, 681–689.

Rochel, N., Wurtz, J.M., Mitschler, A., Klaholz, B., Moras, D., 2000.
The crystal structure of the nuclear receptor for vitamin D bound
to its natural ligand. Mol. Cell 5, 173–179.

Ruggiero, M., Pacini, S., Aterini, S., Fallai, C., Ruggiero, C., Pacini,
P., 1998. Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism is associated
with metastatic breast cancer. Oncol. Res. 10, 43–46.

Saijo, T., Ito, M., Takeda, E., Mahbubul Huq, A.H.M., Naito, E.,
Yokota, I., Sone, T., Pike, J.W., Kuroda, Y., 1991. A unique
mutation in the vitamin D receptor gene in three Japanese pa-
tients with vitamin D-dependent rickets type II: utility of single

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

159

stranded conformation polymorphism analysis for heterozygous
carrier detection. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49, 668–673.

Segura, C., Alonso, M., Fraga, C., Garcia-Caballero, T., Dieguez, C.,
Perez-Fernandez, R., 1999. Vitamin D receptor ontogenesis in rat
liver. Histochem. Cell Biol. 112, 163–167.

Sosa, M., Torres, A., Martin, N., Salido, E., Liminana, J.M., Barrios,
Y., De Miguel, E., Betancor, P., 2000. The distribution of two
different vitamin D receptor polymorphisms (Bsm I and start
codon) in primary hyperparathyroidism. J. Intern. Med. 247,
124–130.

Suh, E., Chen, L., Taylor, J., Traber, P.G., 1994. A homeodomain
protein related to caudal regulates intestine-speciﬁc gene tran-
scription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 7340–7351.

Szpirer, J., Szpirer, C., Riviere, M., Levan, G., Marynen, P., Cassi-
man, J.J., Wiese, R., DeLuca, H.F., 1991. The Sp1 transcription
factor gene (SP1) and the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor gene
(VDR) are colocalized on human chromosome arm 12q and rat
chromosome 7. Genomics 11, 168–173.

Takeuchi, A., Okano, T., Sekimoto, H., Kobayashi, T., 1994. The
enzymatic formation of 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 from 25-
hydroxyvitamin D3 in the liver of fetal rats. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. C Pharmacol. Toxicol. Endocrinol. 109, 1–7.

Tao, C., Yu, T., Garnett, S., Briody, J., Knight, J., Woodhead, H.,
Cowell, C.T., 1998. Vitamin D receptor alleles predict growth and
bone density in girls. Arch. Dis. Child. 79, 488–493.

Terpening, C.M., Haussler, C.A., Jurutka, P.W., Galligan, M.A.,
Komm, B.S., Haussler, M.R., 1991. The vitamin D-responsive
element in the rat bone gla protein is an imperfect direct repeat
that cooperates with other cis-elements in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3-mediated transcriptional activation. Mol. Endocrinol. 5, 373–
385.

Veenstra, T.D., Prufer, K., Koenigsberger, C., Brimijoin, S.W.,
Grande, J.P., Kumar, R., 1998. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 recep-
tors in the central nervous system of the rat embryo. Brain Res.
804, 193–205.

Verbeek, W., Gombart, A.F., Shiohara, M., Campbell, M., Koefﬂer,
H.P., 1997. Vitamin D receptor: no evidence for allele-speciﬁc
mRNA stability in cells which are heterozygous for the Taq I

restriction enzyme polymorphism. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com-
mun. 238, 77–80.

Videman, T., Leppavuori, J., Kaprio, J., Battie, M.C., Gibbons, L.E.,
Peltonen, L., Koskenvuo, M., 1998. Intragenic polymorphisms of
the vitamin D receptor gene associated with intervertebral disc
degeneration. Spine 23, 2477–2485.

Wagner, R.L., Apriletti, J.W., McGrath, M.E., West, B.L., Baxter,
J.D., Fletterick, R.J., 1995. A structural role for hormone in the
thyroid hormone receptor. Nature 378, 690–697.

Watanabe, M., Fukutome, K., Murata, M., Uemura, H., Kubota, Y.,
Kawamura, J., Yatani, R., 1999. Signiﬁcance of vitamin D recep-
tor gene polymorphism for prostate cancer risk in Japanese.
Anticancer Res. 19, 4511–4514.

Whitﬁeld, G.K., Hsieh, J.-C., Nakajima, S., MacDonald, P.N.,
Thompson, P.D., Jurutka, P.W., Haussler, C.A., Haussler, M.R.,
1995. A highly conserved region in the hormone binding domain
of the human vitamin D receptor contains residues vital for
heterodimerization with retinoid X receptor and for transcrip-
tional activation. Mol. Endocrinol. 9, 1166–1179.

Whitﬁeld, G.K., Selznick, S.H., Haussler, C.A., Hsieh, J.-C., Galli-
gan, M.A., Jurutka, P.W., Thompson, P.D., Lee, S.M., Zerwekh,
J.E., Haussler, M.R., 1996. Vitamin D receptors from patients
with resistance to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3: point mutations
confer reduced transactivation in response to ligand and impaired
interaction with the retinoid X receptor heterodimeric partner.
Mol. Endocrinol. 10, 1617–1631.

Whitﬁeld, G.K., Jurutka, P.W., Haussler, C.A., Haussler, M.R.,
1999. Steroid hormone receptors: evolution, ligands and molecu-
lar basis of biologic function. J. Cell. Biochem. Suppl. 32/33,
110–122.

Wood, R.J., Fleet, J.C., 1998. The genetics of osteoporosis: vitamin D

receptor polymorphisms. Ann. Rev. Nutr. 18, 233–258.

Yamamoto, H., Miyamoto, K., Li, B., Taketani, Y., Kitano, M.,
Inoue, Y., Morita, K., Pike, J.W., Takeda, E., 1999. The caudal-
related homeodomain protein Cdx-2 regulates vitamin D receptor
gene expression in the small intestine. J. Bone Miner. Res. 14,
240–247.

.

Modeling of Environmental Effects in Genome-Wide
Association Studies Identifies SLC2A2 and HP as Novel
Loci Influencing Serum Cholesterol Levels

Wilmar Igl1*, A˚ sa Johansson1, James F. Wilson2, Sarah H. Wild2, Ozren Polasˇek3, Caroline Hayward4,
Veronique Vitart4, Nicholas Hastie4, Pavao Rudan5, Carsten Gnewuch6, Gerd Schmitz6, Thomas
Meitinger7, Peter P. Pramstaller8,9,10,11, Andrew A. Hicks8, Ben A. Oostra12, Cornelia M. van Duijn13, Igor
Rudan2,14, Alan Wright2, Harry Campbell2, Ulf Gyllensten1, EUROSPAN Consortium

1 Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden, 2 Centre for Population Health Sciences and Institute of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3 Andrija Sˇtampar School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 4 MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5 Institute for
Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 6 Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Regensburg University Medical Center, Regensburg, Germany,
7 Helmholtz Zentrum Mu¨ nchen, GmbH, Neuherberg, Munich, Germany, 8 Institute of Genetic Medicine, European Academy Bozen/Bolzano (EURAC), Bolzano, Italy,
9 Institute of Genetic Medicine, University of Lu¨ beck, Lu¨ beck, Germany, 10 Department of Neurology, General Central Hospital, Bolzano, Italy, 11 Department of
Neurology, University of Lu¨ beck, Lu¨ beck, Germany, 12 Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 13 Department
of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 14 Croatian Centre for Global Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Split,
Croatia

Abstract

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 38 larger genetic regions affecting classical blood lipid levels
without adjusting for important environmental influences. We modeled diet and physical activity in a GWAS in order to
identify novel loci affecting total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels. The Swedish (SE)
EUROSPAN cohort (NSE = 656) was screened for candidate genes and the non-Swedish (NS) EUROSPAN cohorts (NNS = 3,282)
were used for replication. In total, 3 SNPs were associated in the Swedish sample and were replicated in the non-Swedish
cohorts. While SNP rs1532624 was a replication of the previously published association between CETP and HDL cholesterol,
the other two were novel findings. For the latter SNPs, the p-value for association was substantially improved by inclusion of
environmental covariates: SNP rs5400 (pSE,unadjusted = 3.661025, pSE,adjusted = 2.261026, pNS,unadjusted = 0.047) in the SLC2A2
(Glucose transporter type 2) and rs2000999 (pSE,unadjusted = 1.161023, pSE,adjusted = 3.861024, pNS,unadjusted = 0.035) in the HP
gene (Haptoglobin-related protein precursor). Both showed evidence of association with total cholesterol. These results
demonstrate that inclusion of important environmental factors in the analysis model can reveal new genetic susceptibility
loci.

Citation: Igl W, Johansson A˚ , Wilson JF, Wild SH, Polasˇek O, et al. (2010) Modeling of Environmental Effects in Genome-Wide Association Studies Identifies SLC2A2
and HP as Novel Loci Influencing Serum Cholesterol Levels. PLoS Genet 6(1): e1000798. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798

Editor: Paolo Gasparini, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, University of Trieste, Italy

Received July 29, 2009; Accepted December 3, 2009; Published January 8, 2010
Copyright: ß 2010 Igl et al. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

Funding: The European Special Populations Research Network (EUROSPAN) was supported by European Commission FP6 STRP grant number 018947 (LSHG-CT-
2006-01947). High-throughput genome-wide association analysis of the data was supported by joint grant from Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research
and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (NWO-RFBR 047.017.043). Lipidomic analysis was supported by the European Commission FP7 grant LipidomicNet
(2007-202272). The NSPHS study was supported by grants from the Swedish Natural Sciences Research Council, the European Commission through EUROSPAN,
the Foundation for Strategic Research (SSF), and the Linneaus Centre for Bioinformatics (LCB). The ORCADES study was supported by the Scottish Executive
Health Department and the Royal Society. DNA extractions were performed at the Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility in Edinburgh. The VIS study in the
Croatian island of Vis was supported through the grants from the Medical Research Council UK to HC, AW, and IR and the Ministry of Science, Education, and
Sport of the Republic of Croatia to IR (number 108-1080315-0302). The MICROS study was supported by the Ministry of Health and Department of Educational
Assistance, University and Research of the Autonomous Province of Bolzano and the South Tyrolean Sparkasse Foundation. The ERF study was supported by
grants from the NWO, Erasmus MC, and the Centre for Medical Systems Biology (CMSB). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

* E-mail: wilmar.igl@genpat.uu.se

Introduction

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified more
than 38 larger genetic regions which influence blood levels of total
cholesterol
(LDL-C),
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C) and triglycerides
(TG) [1–3]. These studies modeled basic anthropometric con-
founders, such as sex and age, while leaving out
important

low-density lipoprotein cholesterol

(TC),

environmental influences, such as diet and activity. This strategy is
statistically suboptimal since the unexplained variation in the
phenotype can increase the measurement error and as a result
require larger sample sizes to detect a significant effect. Manolio
[4] argued strongly for modeling of environmental covariates in
GWAS and recommended lipid levels as a paradigmatic
phenotype for studying the genetic and environmental architecture
of quantitative traits.

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

1

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

Author Summary

In this article we report a genome-wide association study
on cholesterol
levels in the human blood. We used a
Swedish cohort to select genetic polymorphisms that
showed the strongest association with cholesterol levels
adjusted for diet and physical activity. We replicated
several genetic loci
in other European cohorts. This
approach extends present genome-wide association stud-
ies on lipid levels, which did not take these lifestyle factors
into account, to improve statistical results and discover
novel genes. In our analysis, we could identify two genetic
loci in the SLC2A2 (Glucose transporter type 2) and the HP
(Haptoglobin-related protein precursor) gene whose ef-
fects on total cholesterol have not been reported yet. The
results show that inclusion of important environmental
factors in the analysis model can reveal new insights into
genetic determinants of clinical parameters relevant for
metabolic and cardiovascular disease.

In order to explore the usefulness of including both environ-
mental and genetic factors in the analysis model, we used lipid
measurements from the EUROSPAN study, comprising 3,938
individuals for whom genome-wide SNP data (NSNP = 311,388)
were available [5]. We measured daily intake of food and physical
activity at work and at leisure and modeled the influence of those
environmental covariates on serum lipid levels in a GWAS. First,
data from the Northern Sweden Population Health Study
(NSPHS) were used as a discovery cohort to screen for SNPs
that displayed the lowest p-values when the model was adjusted for
environmental covariates. We then used the other, non-Swedish
EUROSPAN cohorts for replication of our strongest associations
in a candidate gene association study (CGAS).

shows

We chose a population living in northern Sweden for the
selection of candidate loci because it
strong natural
heterogeneity in certain lifestyle factors (e.g. diet, activity), but
homogeneity in other environmental aspects such as climate [6].
Whereas one group is living a modern, sedentary lifestyle found
also in the southern part of Sweden and other western European
countries, a subgroup of Swedes follows a traditional, semi-
nomadic way of life based on reindeer herding. Reindeer herders
typically show higher intake of game meat (reindeer, moose),
which has a high protein and low fat content, and lower intake of
non-game meat,
lesser
differences. They also exert more physical activity at work to tend
their reindeer herds, but less activity at leisure [7].

fish, and dairy products among other,

Results

Exploratory GWAS in NSPHS

We performed a GWAS with a lifestyle-adjusted model which
included not only sex and age, but also daily intake of game meat,
non-game meat, fish, milk products, physical activity at work and
at leisure as covariates. We focused on the 0.05% of all SNPs with
the lowest p-values
in the diet- and activity-adjusted model
(corresponding to about 150 SNPs per lipid). For total cholesterol,
88 of these were located in a gene and 14 in genes that have been
associated with energy metabolism (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/omim/). For LDL-C, 65 SNPs were located in a gene, of
which 8 were functionally relevant. Several of the SNPs for LDL-
C were identical with those affecting total cholesterol, as expected
from the high correlation (r = 0.91) between both phenotypes. For
HDL-C, SNP rs2292883, located in the MLPH gene (Melanophi-
lin), showed a genome-wide significant p-value (p = 1.06610207).

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

69 SNPs for HDL-C were located in a gene and 14 of those genes
were reported as having a metabolic effect. Finally,
for
triglycerides, 63 SNPs were located in a gene, but only 4 SNPs
in genes with a functional annotation of interest (Table 1 and
Table S1A, S1B, S1C, S1D).

P-value changes

In order to evaluate the effect of including diet and activity
covariates in the association analysis, we overlaid the p-values in
the Manhattan plots from the NSPHS for the unadjusted and
adjusted GWAS models (Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 4).
More refined GWAS results separating the effect of adjusting for
either diet or physical activity are presented in Figure S1A, S1B,
S1C, S1D; and Figure S2A, S2B, S2C, S2D. As expected, the
p-values for a number of SNPs were sensitive to the inclusion of
both diet and activity covariates in the model. We matched the
0.05% SNPs with the lowest p-values (top SNP list) between the
unadjusted and the adjusted model. For TC, 83 (53%) SNPs were
found in both top SNP lists. Those lists contained 102 (64%)
identical SNPs for LDL-C and 103 (65%)
for HDL-C. The
analyses resulted in the same 74 (47%) top SNPs for TG levels
(Table S1A, S1B, S1C, S1D). Finally, we compared the p-value
changes of the resulting 39 candidate SNPs that are located in
genes with a metabolic effect between the diet and activity-
adjusted (full) model and the unadjusted (restricted) model
resulting in an up to 27-fold p-value decrease (Table 1).

Confirmatory CGAS in EUROSPAN

rs1532624 (pSC,unadj = 2.40610209, pSC,adj = 1.96610209)

A food- and activity-adjusted candidate gene association study of
the final 39 candidate SNPs in the Scottish (SC) sample (N = 714) was
applied using similar lifestyle covariates (Table 2; Table S1E, S1F,
S1G, S1H; Table S2). We replicated the effect of rs2000999
(pSC,unadj = 6.16610203, pSC,adj = 4.33610203)
in the HP gene
(Haptoglobin-related protein Precursor) on TC level and the effect
of
in
CETP (Cholesteryl ester transfer protein) on HDL-C. In the Swedish
cohort (SE), the unadjusted genetic effect of rs2000999 in the HP
gene is equivalent to a moderately large difference in average TC
level of 20.21 mg/dl between the homozyguous genotypes (Mean-
SE,unadj(TC|A/A)2MeanSE,unadj(TC|G/G) = 243.162222.95, Ef-
fect SizeSE,unadj = 0.41, Effect SizeSE,adj = 0.44)(Effect Size (ES) =
(MA/A2MB/B)/SDpooled). Equivalent effects were observed in the
Scottish replication sample (MSC,unadj(TC|A/A)2MSC,unadj(TC|G/
G) = 235.36 mg /dl2222.54 mg /dl = 12.82 mg/dl, ESSC,unadj =
0.29, ESSC,adj = 0.52). SNP rs1532624 in the CETP gene is associated
with a large, unadjusted difference in HDL-C level of 9.99 mg/
(MSE,unadj(HDL-C|A/A)2MSE,unadj(HDL-C|C/C) = 68.14 mg/
dl
dl258.15 mg/dl, ESSE,unadj = 0.73, ESSE,adj = 0.48) in the discovery
cohort and similar effects regarding direction and size in the
(MSC,unadj(HDL-C|A/A)2MSC,unadj(HDL-C|
replication
C/C) = 69.79 mg/dl260.75 mg/dl = 9.04 mg/dl; ESSC, unadj = 0.59,
ES

(Scotland, Croatia, The Netherlands,

SC, adj = 0.57).
We also performed an unadjusted candidate gene analysis of
the 39 candidate SNPs in all non-Swedish (NS) EUROSPAN
cohorts
and Italy,
NNS = 3,282) and aggregated the results
in a meta-analysis
(Table 2; Table S1I, S1J, S1K, S1L). We confirmed the effects
of rs5400 (pNS = 4.68610202) in SLC2A2 on TC. We again found
that rs2000999 (pNS,unadj = 3.5461022)
in HP influences TC
levels and rs1532624 (pNS,unadj = 2.87610220) in CETP (Choles-
teryl ester transfer protein) affects HDL-C levels. The unadjusted
genetic effect of rs5400 is equivalent
to a moderately large
difference in mean TC level of 27.11 mg/dl between homozyguous
(MSE,unadj(TC|A/A)2MSE,unadj(TC|G/G) = 249.30 mg/
genotypes

cohort

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

2

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

SNP

TC

rs10513684

rs1684885

rs5400

rs47137

rs669552

rs2303324

rs12617790

rs10041333

rs222014

rs2000999

rs2070657

rs2186830

rs2478571

LDL-C

rs1684885

rs1684881

rs10513684

rs5400

rs12617790

rs7583934

rs1864616

rs843319

HDL-C

rs2292883

rs12712846

rs365578

rs9866473

rs10519336

rs2054247

rs11708205

rs9863761

rs2124147

rs1567385

rs3776817

rs1999088

rs1782644

2.91E-05

3.47E-03

3.57E-05

3.69E-03

3.46E-03

1.49E-03

2.26E-03

3.04E-03

2.93E-03

1.08E-06

2.01E-04

2.18E-06

2.63E-04

2.87E-04

1.65E-04

2.53E-04

3.74E-04

3.71E-04

1.12E-03

3.84E-04

1.70E-04

2.66E-04

3.07E-04

1.53E-04

2.80E-04

1.98E-04

4.22E-04

1.65E-03

2.78E-04

8.64E-05

6.74E-05

1.48E-06

1.14E-03

8.39E-04

1.43E-04

2.78E-04

4.42E-04

1.61E-05

3.14E-05

2.61E-05

6.10E-05

2.96E-04

1.84E-04

1.36E-04

2.89E-04

1.06E-07*

3.02E-04

2.92E-04

4.34E-04

2.55E-04

6.34E-04

3.73E-05

2.67E-04

5.20E-06

1.49E-04

1.32E-04

6.82E-05

7.19E-05

1.39E-04

3.82E-04

3.70E-05

3.57E-04

7.74E-06

2.23E-04

1.99E-04

1.31E-04

1.51E-04

3.10E-04

27

17

16

14

12

9

9

8

8

3

1

1

1

10

9

8

7

6

2

2

4

14

4

3

2

2

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

7

8

3

2

SLC2A2

PRKCI

SLC2A2

SLC2A12

FNDC3B

GALNT14

GALNT14

FABP6

GC

HP

APP

COLEC12

SLC39A12

PRKCI

PRKCI

SLC2A2

SLC2A2

GALNT14

LRP1B

TGFBR2

MBOAT1

MLPH

MTA3

NDUFS4

CETP

MCC

APLP2

PLD1

CETP

CETP

MAP4K4

ADAMTS2

MBNL2

ZMIZ1

CETP

IGF2BP3

IGF2BP3

IGF2BP3

BBS9

Glucose transporter type 2 (GLUT-2)

Protein kinase C iota type (nPKC-iota)

Glucosetransportertype2(GLUT-2)

Glucose transporter type 12 (GLUT-12)

Factor for Adipocyte Differentiation 104

Polypeptide GalNAc transferase 14

Polypeptide GalNAc transferase 14

Gastrotropin (GT), alt. Fatty Acid-Binding Protein 6

Vitamin D-binding protein Precursor (DBP)

Haptoglobin-relatedproteinPrecursor

Alzheimer disease amyloid protein (ABPP)

Collectin-12

Zinc transporter (ZIP12)

Protein kinase C iota type (nPKC-iota)

Protein kinase C iota type (nPKC-iota)

Glucose transporter type 2 (GLUT-2)

Glucose transporter type 2(GLUT-2)

Polypeptide GalNAc transferase 14

Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP-DIT)

Transforming growth factor-beta receptor type II (TGFR-2)

O-acyltransferase domain-containing protein 1

Melanophilin

Metastasis-associated protein

NADH dehydrogenase 8 iron-sulfur protein 4 (CI-AQDQ)

Cholesteryl ester transfer protein

Colorectal mutant cancer protein

Amyloid-like protein 2 Precursor

Phospholipase D1

Cholesteryl ester transfer protein

Cholesteryl ester transfer protein

Mitogen-activated protein kinase 4 (MEKKK4)

Procollagen I N-proteinase

Muscleblind-like protein 2

Zinc finger MIZ domain-containing protein 1

Cholesterylestertransferprotein

Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 3

Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 3

Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 3

Parathyroid hormone-responsive B1 gene protein (PTHB1)

Table 1. Candidate SNPs (n = 39) selected from the Swedish discovery cohort.

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

p-value,
unadjusteda

p-value,
adjustedb

p-value ratioc

Gene Symbol

Product name (Product Symbol)

rs1532624

1.06E-06

2.55E-06

TG

rs4304239

rs11770192

rs12540730

rs3823763

1.63E-03

1.82E-03

7.79E-04

9.58E-05

2.40E-04

2.40E-04

2.43E-04

4.45E-05

All candidate SNPs show strongest associations (p-value, top 0.05% SNPs per lipid trait) and are located in a gene which has been reported to be relevant for energy
metabolism. SNPs are sorted by p-value ratio (unadjusted:unadjusted).
*p#1.6E-07 = genome-wide significant; All SNPs in genes with at least one replicated SNP are displayed in bold, replicated SNPs are formated in bold italics. a)
unadjusted = covariates include sex and age; b) adjusted = covariates include sex, age, game meat, non-game meat, fish, milk products, physical activity at work and at
leisure; c) p-ratio = max(punadjusted:padjusted; padjusted:punadjusted); punadjusted:padjusted ratios are aligned left, padjusted:punadjusted ratios are aligned right.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.t001

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

3

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

Figure 1. Manhattan plot of genome-wide effects on total cholesterol levels in the Swedish discovery cohort. Results for two GWAS
analysis models are presented. The unadjusted model (dark blue and light blue circles) included only sex and age as covariates. The adjusted model
(red and orange squares) additionally contained food intake and physical activity as predictors. The dashed line indicates the local Bonferroni-
adjusted a error = 1.661027.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.g001

dl2222.19 mg/dl, ESSE,unadj = 0.57, ESSE,adj = 0.66) in the Swedish
Cohort and a small
in all non-Swedish samples
(MNS,unadj(TC|A/A)2MNS,unadj(TC|G/G) = 236.69 mg/dl2223.34
mg/dl = 13.35 mg/dl, ESNS,unadj = 0.30).

total effect

No other associations, including LDL cholesterol or triglycerides
levels, were replicated (all p.0.05). The genome-wide significant
SNP rs2292883 in the Melanophilin (MLPH) gene found in the
Swedish cohort was not confirmed.

Discussion

Environmental covariates may either act as moderators,
mediators or even suppressors, thereby affecting the discovery of
genetic susceptibility loci
[8,9]. Therefore, we conducted a
GWAS, modeling genetic and important environmental effects,
such as food intake and physical activity, on serum levels of
classical lipids. To our knowledge, this is the first GWAS on blood
lipid levels modeling environmental factors, in particular major
food categories and physical activity, in international cohorts. Our
analysis replicated one known locus in the CETP gene [1] and
in the SLC2A2 and HP gene,
identified two other gene loci
respectively,
involved in energy metabolism but not previously
reported to be associated with cholesterol levels.

SLC2A2 encodes the facilitated glucose transporter member 2
(GLUT-2, Solute carrier family 2) and is predominantly expressed
in the liver. Mice deficient in GLUT-2 are hyperglycemic and
have elevated plasma levels of glucagon and free fatty acids [10].

Mutations in GLUT-2 cause the Fanconi-Bickel syndrome (FBS)
characterized by hypercholesterolemia
and hyperlipidemia
[11,12]. Cerf [13] argued that a high-fat diet causes a decreased
expression of the GLUT-2 glucose receptor on b-cell islets. As a
result, glucose stimulation of insulin exocytosis is impaired causing
hyperglycemia, a clinical hallmark of type 2 diabetes. In addition,
Kilpelainen et al. [14] found that physical activity moderates the
genetic effect of SLC2A2 on type 2 diabetes. These studies suggest
that these lifestyle factors could have masked genetic effects in
previous, unadjusted GWAS. This is emphasized by the strong
increase in statistical significance of the SLC2A2 polymorphisms
after adjusting for diet and physical activity, indicating that the
examined lifestyle factors modified the effect of this gene. Our
supplemental
show that physical activity markedly
moderated the genetic effect on total cholesterol.

results

encodes

The HP gene

the Haptoglobin-related Protein
Precursor (Hp), which binds hemoglobin (Hb) to form a stable
Hp-Hb complex and, thereby, prevents Hb-induced oxidative
tissue damage. Asleh et al. [15] identified severe impairment in the
ability of Hp to prevent oxidation caused by glycosylated Hb.
Diabetes is also associated with an increase in the non-enzymatic
glycosylation of serum proteins, so these authors suggested that
there is a specific interaction between diabetes, cardiovascular
disease and the Hp genotype. It results from the increased need of
rapidly clearing glycosylated Hb-Hp complexes from the suben-
dothelial
space before they oxidatively modify low-density
lipoprotein to form the atherogenic oxidized low-density lipopro-

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

4

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

Figure 2. Manhattan plot of genome-wide effects on LDL cholesterol levels in the Swedish discovery cohort. Results for two GWAS
analysis models are presented. The unadjusted model (dark blue and light blue circles) included only sex and age as covariates. The adjusted model
(red and orange squares) additionally contained food intake and physical activity as predictors. The dashed line indicates the local Bonferroni-
adjusted a error = 1.661027.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.g002

tein. The p-value for association between the HP SNP rs2000999
and total serum cholesterol concentration decreased in the model
adjusted for diet and physical activity, suggesting that the genetic
effect is moderated by diet and physical activity. Our supporting
material points out the moderating role of physical activity in
particular.

the transfer of

We also observed a highly significant association between
rs1532624 in CETP and HDL-C levels. The CETP protein
catalyzes
insoluble cholesteryl esters among
lipoprotein particles. Variation in CETP is known to affect the
susceptibility to atherosclerosis and other cardiovascular diseases
[16]. Adjustment for diet and physical activity in our model caused
an increase of the p-value of this SNP. Our supporting results
indicate that the genetic effect is mediated by diet or by physical
activity in a similar way.

This study also has some limitations. First, we are aware that our
candidate gene association approach covers only a very small
fraction of all genomic loci, which is one of the potential reasons
why some classical lipid-influencing genes, such as APOE, are not
represented in our candidate SNP list. Therefore, our approach is
not comprehensive and may have failed to identify other relevant
lifestyle-sensitive genetic variants. Nonetheless, we decided to apply
this approach to make the best out of the available lifestyle data.
Second, our study provides only limited information on the role of
individual lifestyle factors for a genetic variant. However, in this
study we aimed at amplifying genetic effects by adjusting for a
maximum amount of environmental variance in a single model and,

therefore, we neglected some of these aspects here. Third, we did
not model genetic covariates in known lipid-relevant genes which
may also moderate the effect of other genetic predictors. This is due
to the focus of this paper on gene-environment relationships.

In summary, we have demonstrated that modeling environmen-
tal factors, in particular major food categories and physical activity,
can improve statistical power and lead to the discovery of novel
susceptibility loci. Such models also provide an understanding of the
complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors affecting
human quantitative traits. Inclusion of environmental covariates
represents a much needed next step in the quest to model the
complete environmental and genetic architecture of complex traits.

Methods

Ethics statement

All EUROSPAN studies were approved by the appropriate
research ethics committees according to the Declaration of
Helsinki [17]. The Northern Swedish Population Health Study
(NSPHS) was approved by the local ethics committee at the
University of Uppsala (Regionala Etikpro¨vningsna¨ mnden, Up-
psala). The Scottish ORCADES study was approved by the NHS
Orkney Research Ethics Committee and the North of Scotland
REC. The Croatian VIS study was approved by the ethics
committee of the medical faculty in Zagreb and the Multi-Centre
Research Ethics Committee for Scotland. The Dutch ERF study
was approved by the Erasmus
institutional medical ethics

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

5

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

Figure 3. Manhattan plot of genome-wide effects on HDL cholesterol levels in the Swedish discovery cohort. Results for two GWAS
analysis models are presented. The unadjusted model (dark blue and light blue circles) included only sex and age as covariates. The adjusted model
(red and orange squares) additionally contained food intake and physical activity as predictors. The dashed line indicates the local Bonferroni-
adjusted a error = 1.661027.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.g003

committee in Rotterdam, The Netherlands. The Italian MICROS
study was approved by the ethical committee of the Autonomous
Province of Bolzano, Italy.

Participants

The examined subjects stem from five different population-
representative, pedigree-based cohorts from the EUROSPAN
consortium (http://www.eurospan.org). All
include a
comprehensive collection of data on family structure,
lifestyle,
blood samples for clinical chemistry, RNA and DNA analyses,
medical history, and current health status. All participants gave
their written informed consent [18]. A brief description of each
population is given below:

studies

The Northern Swedish Population Health Study (NSPHS) represents a
cross-sectional study conducted in the community of Karesuando
in the subartic region of the County of Norrbotten, Sweden, in
2006 [5]. This parish has about 1500 eligible inhabitants of whom
740 participated in the study. The final sample consisted of 309
men and 347 women who were aged between 14 and 91 years.
The inclusion of diet and activity covariates in the analytical model
and according missing values reduced the effective sample size by
less than 5%.

The Orkney Complex Disease Study (ORCADES) is a longitudinal
study in the isolated Scottish archipelago of Orkney [19].
Participants from a subgroup of ten islands (N = 719) were used
for the presented analysis. The sample comprised 334 men and
385 women aged between 18 and 100 years. The inclusion of diet

and activity covariates in the analytical model and according
missing values reduced the effective sample size by less than 5%.
The VIS study is a cross-sectional study in the villages of Vis
and Komiza on the Dalmatian island of Vis, Croatia, and was
conducted between 2003 and 2004 [20–22]. 795 participants who
had both genotype and phenotypic data available were analysed.
This cohort included 328 men and 467 women with an age
between 18 and 93 years.

The Microisolates in South Tyrol Study (MICROS)

is a cross-
sectional study carried out in the villages of Stelvio, Vallelunga,
and Martello, Venosta valley, South Tyrol, Italy, from 2001 to
2003 [23]. The 1,097 participants (475 males, 622 females, age
between 18 and 88 years) presented in this study are those for
whom both relevant genotype and phenotype data were available.
The Erasmus Rucphen Family Study (ERF) is a longitudinal study
on a population living in the Rucphen region, the Netherlands,
in the 19th century [24]. Fasting total cholesterol, HDL
cholesterol and triglyceride levels were available. LDL choles-
terol was estimated using the Friedewald formula [25]. The 918
individuals included in this study consisted of the first series of
participants with 354 men and 564 women aged between 18
and 92 years.

Genotyping

DNA samples were genotyped according to the manufacturer’s
instructions on Illumina Infinium HumanHap300v2 or Hu-
manCNV370v1 SNP bead microarrays. Both arrays have

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

6

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

Figure 4. Manhattan plot of genome-wide effects on triglyceride levels in the Swedish discovery cohort. Results for two GWAS analysis
models are presented. The unadjusted model (dark blue and light blue circles) included only sex and age as covariates. The adjusted model (red and
orange squares) additionally contained food intake and physical activity as predictors. The dashed line indicates the local Bonferroni-adjusted a
error = 1.661027.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.g004

311,388 SNP markers in common that are distributed across the
human genome. Analysis of
the raw data was done in the
BeadStudio software with the recommended parameters for the
Infinium assay and using the genotype cluster files provided by
Illumina. Individuals with a call rate below 95% and SNPs with a
call rate below 98%, deviating from Hard-Weinberg equilibrium

(pHWE,161026) or with a minor allele frequency of less than 1%
were excluded from the analysis.

Lipids

Total cholesterol

(TC),

(LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol

low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C), and

Table 2. SNPs (n = 3) discovered in a Swedish and replicated in a non-Swedish EUROSPAN cohort.

SNP

Gene

Trait

Cohort

rs2000999

HP

TC

Discovery, SE

rs1532624

CETP

HDL-C

Discovery, SE

Replication, SC

Replication, SC

rs5400

SLC2A2

TC

Discovery, SE

Replication, NS

p-value,
unadjusteda

p-value,
adjustedb

Mean Difference,
unadjustedc

Effect Size,
unadjustedd

Effect Size,
adjustede

1.12E-03

6.16E-03

1.06E-06

2.40E-09

3.57E-05

4.68E-02

3.84E-04

4.33E-03

2.55E-06

1.96E-09

2.18E-06

N.A.

20.21 mg/dl

12.82 mg/dl

9.99 mg/dl

9.04 mg/dl

27.11 mg/dl

13.35 mg/dl

0.41

0.29

0.73

0.59

0.57

0.30

0.44

0.52

0.48

0.57

0.66

N.A.

For all replicated SNPs p-values, mean differences, and effects sizes for unadjusted and adjusted lipid levels between homozygous genotypes are reported except for
replication cohort NS. Discovery Cohort SE: Swedish EUROSPAN cohort (NSE = 656), Replication Cohort SC: Scottish EUROSPAN cohort (NSc = 714), Replication Cohort NS:
Non-Swedish EUROSPAN cohorts (Scotland, Croatia, Italy, Netherlands, NNS = 3,282), N.A.: not available; a) unadjusted: covariates include sex and age, b) adjusted:
covariates include sex, age, game meat, non-game meat, fish, milk products, physical activity at work and at leisure, c) Genetic effect as mean difference of unadjusted
lipid levels between homozygous genotypes: M(A/A)2M(B/B), d) Genetic effect as standardized effect size of unadjusted lipid levels: ES = (MA/A2MB/B)/SDpooled, e)
Genetic effect as standardized effect size of adjusted lipid levels: ES = (MA/A2MB/B)/SDpooled.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.t002

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

7

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

triglycerides (TG) were quantified by enzymatic photometric
assays using an ADVIA1650 clinical chemistry analyzer (Siemens
Healthcare Diagnostics GmbH, Eschborn, Germany) at
the
Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine,
Regensburg University Medical Center, Germany.

Diet

In the NSPHS cohort, we collected data with a food frequency
questionnaire based on the Northern Sweden 84-item Food
Frequency Questionnaire (NoS-84-FFQ) [26]. We included in the
questionnaire several items on foods specific for the lifestyle in this
geographic region, in particular on game consumption (reindeer,
moose). The answer options consisted of an 11-point format:
0 = ‘‘Never’’, 1 = ‘‘less than 1 time per month’’, 2 = ‘‘1 to 3 times
per month’’, 3 = ‘‘1 time per week’’, 4 = ‘‘2 to 4 times per week’’,
5 = ‘‘5 to 6 times per week’’, 6 = ‘‘1 time per day’’, 7 = ‘‘2 to 3
times per day’’, 8 = ‘‘4 to 5 times per day’’, 9 = ‘‘6 to 8 times per
day’’, 10 = ‘‘9 to 10 times per day’’. The questionnaire was applied
in electronic format by a trained study nurse as an interviewer. For
each food item we calculated daily intake in gram per day as a
standardized unit of measurement and aggregated the items to
food categories, such game meat, non-game meat, fish, and dairy
products. We evaluated the construct validity (known-groups
validity) of the added items on game consumption in the NoS-84-
FFQ questionnaire. We compared reindeer herders (N = 94) versus
non-reindeer herders (N = 505). We observed highly significant,
large effect sizes in men (ES = 1.25, p = 9.7610204) and women
(ES = 1.15, p = 2.9610205) in the expected direction correspond-
ing with an approximately three times higher consumption of
absolute overall game intake in reindeer herders compared to
others. A similar approach was used for the measurement and
analysis of dietary data collected with a food frequency
questionnaire in the Scottish cohort (Table S2).

Physical activity

In the NSPHS cohort, we used two self-report scales to measure
overall physical activity at work and at leisure. The Work Activity
Scale (WAS, 6 items) addresses typical occupational physical
activities: sitting, standing, walking, lifting, and general indicators
of physical activity, i. e. sweating and tiredness after work. The
Leisure Activity Scale (LAS, 4 items) asks for various typical
freetime activities such walking, cycling, other sporting activities,
and sweating as a general
indicator of physical activity.
Participants reported the frequency of each activity on a 5-point
rating scale (1 = ‘‘never’’, 2 = ‘‘seldom’’, 3 = ‘‘sometimes’’, 4 = ‘‘of-
ten’’, and 5 = ‘‘always’’). Both scales showed satisfying internal
consistency with Cronbach’s a(WAS) = 0.73 and Cronbach’s
a(LAS) = 0.70. A similar approach was used for the measurement
and analysis of data on physical activity collected with a self-report
questionnaire in the Scottish cohort (Table S2).

Statistical analysis

Model selection. Sex and age are chosen as

standard
moderators of medical outcomes. Food and physical activity
covariates have been selected based on findings on natural
variation in lifestyle factors in this (data not presented) and other
[7] northern Swedish populations between a modern, sedentary
and a traditional,
semi-nomadic lifestyle based on reindeer
herding. Mostly significant associations between diet and activity
covariates and lipid levels were found in the examined Swedish
EUROSPAN cohort in the following ranges: r = [20.01;0.12] (p =
[1.28610202;0.16]) for game meat, r = [20.13;20.05] (p = [8.636
10204;0.74])
(p = [2.126
(p = [2.51610209;
10205;0.12])

for non-game meat,

r = [0.04;0.13]

r = [0.06;0.16]

fish,

for

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

for physical activity at

3.85610206]) for physical activity at work, and r = [20.11;0.01]
(p = [5.05610209;1.30610206])
leisure
(Table S3). We finally selected sex, age, game meat, non-game
meat, fish, dairy products, physical activity at work, and physical
activity at leisure as covariates in our diet- and activity-adjusted
model (‘‘adjusted’’ model) in the Swedish EUROSPAN sample.
Sex and age were used as covariates in the ‘‘unadjusted’’ model.
We tested whether the inclusion of those covariates in the
explanatory model led to a statistical significant improvement of
the goodness of model fit compared to a restricted model by
applying a maximum likelihood ratio (MLR) test. We inferred a
significant better model fit of the full model if the difference of the
x2 value between both models had an equal or lower probability
than p = 0.05 (one-sided, upper tail) on a x2 distribution with k
degrees of freedom. The degrees of freedom k are equal to the
difference of the number of parameters in each model. The
difference of x2 values between both models
is calculated
according to the following formula with MLE indicating the
maximum likelihood estimates per model: x2(rest2full) = 22
(log10(MLErest)2log10(MLEfull)). The comparison of the goodness
of fit between the unadjusted and the diet- and activity-adjusted
full model, using a MLR test, showed a statistically significant
improvement for all four lipid traits (TC: x2
diff = 59.69, df = 6,
diff = 39.45, df = 6, p = 5.85610207;
p = 5.21610211; LDL-C: x2
HDL-C: x2
diff = 69.32,
df = 6, p = 5.65610213). All
included polygenic, anthropometric
and lifestyle factors (with the effect of including only the polygenic,
sex, and age effects in parentheses) explained 64.07% (58.02%) of
the variation of TC, 59.47% (56.47%) of the variation of LDL-C,
83.73% (82.59%) of the variance of HDL-C and 58.68% (41.80%)
of the variation of TG levels. Dietary measures accounted for 22%
(TC), 40% (LDL-C), 74% (HDL-C), and 7% (TG), respectively, of
the variance explained by lifestyle factors with physical activity
being responsible for the rest. GWAS results for models adjusted
for sex, age, and diet only (Figures S1A, S1B, S1C, S1D) or
physical activity only (Figures S2A, S2B, S2C, S2D) are presented
in the supporting figures.

diff = 29.57, df = 6, p = 4.75610205; TG: x2

level and LDL cholesterol

The confounding effect of

treatment with statins on total
cholesterol
level was adjusted for by
imputing untreated lipid concentrations of medicated individuals
using the npsubtreated() function of the R/GenABEL package which
implements the algorithm of Tobin et al. [27]. Additionally, we
conducted the same analysis in subsamples which did not receive any
lipid-lowering treatment and found overall converging, but somewhat
pSC,adj =
weaker
2.07610202,
(pSE,adj =
pNS,unadj = 2.37610219), and
2.26610205;
pNS,unadj =
rs5400
8.04610202) (Table S4).

for
pNS,unadj = 5.93610202),

rs2000999 (pSE,adj = 2.55610204;

(pSE,adj = 5.34610206;

pSC,adj = 2.28610209,

pSC,adj = 2.23610201,

rs1532624

results

the

above mentioned

Genome-wide association analysis. First, deviations from
normality for all quantitative traits (lipids, age, diet, and physical
activity) were corrected by inverse-normal transformation without
adjusting for covariates. Second, linear mixed effects models were
fitted for the transformed outcomes (TC, LDL-C, HDL-C, TG)
using
in the Swedish
EUROSPAN sample and corresponding measures
in the
Scottish EUROSPAN sample (Table S2). The analysis was
performed using the ‘‘polygenic’’
linear mixed effects model
function polygenic() of the R/GenABEL package. Third, genome-
wide association analysis was performed using a score test, a
family-based association test [28], implemented in the mmscore()
function of R/GenABEL. It uses the residuals and the variance-
covariance matrix from the polygenic model and additional the
SNP fixed effect coded under an additive model (0 = A/A, 1 = A/

covariates

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

8

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

B, 2 = B/B). Fourth, genome-wide significance of a genetic loci
type I error of a = 0.05/311 388
was based on a local
SNPs = 1.661027 according to a Bonferroni adjustment.

Candidate gene association analysis. The same statistical
approach was used for association analysis of candidate loci with a
local type I error of a = 0.05. No Bonferroni adjustment was
applied to protect against a inflation since this method would be
biased for the following reasons. The applied selection procedure
for candidate loci makes the assumption of a global null hypothesis
highly unlikely. Additionally, the phenotypes and some of the
genotypes are highly correlated decreasing the number of
independent tests. Instead all confirmatory tests are reported to
allow the reader to evaluate the overall significance of the findings
[29].

Relatedness. l coefficients of lifestyle-adjusted genome-wide
analysis varied in a low range between 1.00 and 1.04 in the
Swedish cohort (see QQ-plots, Figures S3A, S3B, S3C, S3D, and
Figure S4A, S4B, S4C, S4D) and between 1.00 and 1.01 in the
Scottish cohort across all lipid traits. l values for the unadjusted
model used in the other three EUROSPAN cohorts did not exceed
1.01. These values indicate that our statistical model adequately
handled relatedness in our pedigree-based samples since deflation
of l values is expected after correction for family structure.

system R (V2.8.1)

Software and databases. We performed all analysis with the
statistical analysis
[30] mainly using the
packages GenABEL (V1.4.2) [31] and biomarRt (V1.16.0) [32]. We
accessed the following databases: Ensembl (http://www.ensembl.
org) and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Men (http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/omim/).

Supporting Information

Figure S1 Manhattan plots of genome-wide effects on total
cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride
levels in the Swedish discovery cohort. Results for two GWAS
analysis models are presented. The unadjusted model (dark blue
and light blue circles) included only sex and age as covariates. The
adjusted model (red and orange squares) additionally contained
dietary measures (game meat, non-game meat, fish, milk products)
as predictors. The dashed line indicates the local Bonferroni-
adjusted a error = 1.661027.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s001 (0.31 MB
DOC)

Figure S2 Manhattan plots of genome-wide effects on total
cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride
levels in the Swedish discovery cohort. Results for two GWAS
analysis models are presented. The unadjusted model (dark blue
and light blue circles) included only sex and age as covariates. The
adjusted model (red and orange squares) additionally contained
physical activity measures (job, leisure) as predictors. The dashed
line indicates the local Bonferroni-adjusted a error = 1.661027.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s002 (0.31 MB
DOC)

for

Figure S3 QQ-Plots
the unadjusted GWAS on total
cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride
levels in the Swedish discovery cohort. The analysis model was
only adjusted for sex and age, but not for diet and activity
measures (black line = expected slope under no inflation, red
line = slope fitted to observations).
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s003 (0.12 MB
DOC)

Figure S4 QQ-Plots for the adjusted GWAS on total cholesterol,
LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and triglyceride levels in the

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

Swedish discovery cohort. The analysis model was adjusted for
sex, age, diet and activity measures (black line = expected slope
under no inflation, red line = slope fitted to observations).
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s004 (0.12 MB
DOC)

Table S1 GWAS results for all top candidate SNPs (0.05%) in
the Swedish (SE) discovery cohort, the Scottish (SC), and all non-
Swedish (NS) replication cohorts.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s005 (0.41 MB
XLS)

Table S2 Comparison of the diet- and activity-adjusted analysis
model in the Swedish and the Scottish cohort.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s006 (0.04 MB
DOC)

Table S3 Pearson correlations, determination coefficients (ex-
plained variance), and p-values of the inverse-normal transformed
lipid, dietary, and physical activity measures in the Swedish
cohort.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s007 (0.03 MB
XLS)

Table S4 GWAS results for all top SNPs (0.05%) in the Swedish
(SE) discovery cohort, and for all candidate SNPs in the Scottish
(SC), and in the non-Swedish (NS) replication cohorts including
only individuals without lipid-lowering treatment.
Found at: doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000798.s008 (0.34 MB
XLS)

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the many colleagues who contributed to collection
and phenotypic characterization of the samples, genotyping and analysis of
the GWAS data, as well as lipid species analysis. We would also like to
acknowledge those who agreed to participate in these studies.
NSPHS: We are grateful for the contribution of samples from the Medical
Biobank in Umea˚ and for the contribution of the district nurse Svea
Hennix. ORCADES: We would like to acknowledge the invaluable
contributions of Lorraine Anderson and the research nurses in Orkney, the
administrative team in Edinburgh and the people of Orkney. VIS: We
collectively thank a large number of individuals for their individual help in
organizing, planning and carrying out the field work related to the project
and data management: Professor Pavao Rudan and the staff of the Institute
for Anthropological Research in Zagreb, Croatia (organization of the field
work, anthropometric and physiological measurements, and DNA
extraction); Professor Ariana Vorko-Jovic and the staff and medical
students of the Andrija Sˇ tampar School of Public Health of the Faculty of
Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia (questionnaires, genealogical
reconstruction and data entry); Dr Branka Salzer from the biochemistry lab
‘‘Salzer’’, Croatia (measurements of biochemical
local general
practitioners and nurses (recruitment and communication with the study
population); and the employees of several other Croatian institutions who
participated in the field work, including but not limited to the University of
Rijeka and Split, Croatia; Croatian Institute of Public Health; Institutes of
Public Health in Split and Dubrovnik, Croatia. SNP Genotyping of the Vis
samples was carried out by the Genetics Core Laboratory at the Wellcome
Trust Clinical Research Facility, WGH, Edinburgh. MICROS: We thank
the primary care practitioners Raffaela Stocker, Stefan Waldner, Toni
Pizzecco, Josef Plangger, Ugo Marcadent and the personnel of the Hospital
of Silandro (Department of Laboratory Medicine) for their participation
and collaboration in the research project. ERF: We are grateful to all
patients and their relatives, general practitioners, and neurologists for their
contributions and to P. Veraart for her help in genealogy, Jeannette
Vergeer for the supervision of the laboratory work and P. Snijders for his
help in data collection. UPPMAX: The computations were performed on
UPPMAX (http://www.uppmax.uu.se) resources under Project p2008027.
Further information about The European Special Populations Research
Network (EUROSPAN) consortium is available at http//www.eurospan.
org.

traits);

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

9

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

Author Contributions

Conceived and designed the experiments: JFW NH PR TM PPP AAH
BAO CMvD IR AW HC UG. Performed the experiments: sJ SHW OP

References

1. Aulchenko YS, Ripatti S, Lindqvist I, Boomsma D, Heid IM, et al. (2009) Loci
influencing lipid levels and coronary heart disease risk in 16 European
population cohorts. Nat Genet 41: 47–55. doi:10.1038/ng.269.

2. Sabatti C, Service SK, Hartikainen A, Pouta A, Ripatti S, et al. (2009) Genome-
wide association analysis of metabolic traits in a birth cohort from a founder
population. Nat Genet 41: 35–46. doi:10.1038/ng.271.

3. Kathiresan S, Willer CJ, Peloso GM, Demissie S, Musunuru K, et al. (2009)
Common variants at 30 loci contribute to polygenic dyslipidemia. Nat Genet 41:
56–65. doi:10.1038/ng.291.

4. Manolio TA (2009) Cohort studies and the genetics of complex disease. Nat

5.

Genet 41: 5–6. doi:10.1038/ng0109-5.
Johansson A, Marroni F, Hayward C, Franklin CS, Kirichenko AV, et al. (2009)
Common variants in the JAZF1 gene associated with height identified by linkage
and genome-wide association analysis. Hum Mol Genet 18: 373–380.
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddn350.

6. Ross AB, Johansson A, Ingman M, Gyllensten U (2006) Lifestyle, genetics, and

disease in Sami. Croat Med J 47: 553–65. doi:16909452.

7. Ross A, Johansson A˚ , Vavruch-Nilsson V, Hassler S, Sjo¨lander P, et al. (2009)
Adherence to a traditional
lifestyle affects food and nutrient intake among
modern Swedish Sami. International Journal of Circumpolar Health 68:
313–416.

8. Pearl J (2003) Statistics and causal inference: A review. TEST 12: 281–345.

doi:10.1007/BF02595718.

9. Baron RM, Kenny DA (1986) The moderator-mediator variable distinction in
social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations.
J Pers Soc Psychol 51: 1173–82.

10. Guillam MT, Hu¨ mmler E, Schaerer E, Yeh JI, Birnbaum MJ, et al. (1997) Early
diabetes and abnormal postnatal pancreatic islet development in mice lacking
Glut-2. Nat Genet 17: 327–330. doi:10.1038/ng1197-327.

11. Santer R, Schneppenheim R, Dombrowski A, Go¨tze H, Steinmann B, et al.
(1997) Mutations in GLUT2, the gene for the liver-type glucose transporter, in
patients with Fanconi-Bickel syndrome. Nat Genet 17: 324–326. doi:10.1038/
ng1197-324.

12. Manz F, Bickel H, Brodehl J, Feist D, Gellissen K, et al. (1987) Fanconi-Bickel

syndrome. Pediatr Nephrol 1: 509–518.

13. Cerf ME (2007) High fat diet modulation of glucose sensing in the beta-cell. Med

Sci Monit 13: RA12–17.

14. Kilpelainen TO, Lakka TA, Laaksonen DE, Laukkanen O, Lindstrom J, et al.
(2007) Physical activity modifies the effect of SNPs in the SLC2A2 (GLUT2) and
ABCC8 (SUR1) genes on the risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Physiol
Genomics 31: 264–272. doi:10.1152/physiolgenomics.00036.2007.

15. Asleh R, Marsh S, Shilkrut M, Binah O, Guetta J, et al. (2003) Genetically
determined heterogeneity in hemoglobin scavenging and susceptibility to
diabetic cardiovascular disease. Circ Res 92: 1193–1200. doi:10.1161/
01.RES.0000076889.23082.F1.

Modeling of Environmental Effects in GWAS

CH VV CG. Analyzed the data: WI. Contributed reagents/materials/
analysis tools: GS. Wrote the paper: WI UG.

17. World Medical Association (WMA)

(2000) World Medical Association
Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical principles for medical research involving
human subjects [Internet]. Available: http://www.wma.net/e/policy/pdf/17c.
pdf. Accessed 30 Sep 2009.

18. Mascalzoni D, Janssens ACJ, Stewart A, Pramstaller P, Gyllensten U, et al.
(2009) Comparison of participant information and informed consent forms of
five European studies in genetic isolated populations. Eur J Hum Genet,
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19826451. Accessed 19 Oct
2009.

19. McQuillan R, Leutenegger A, Abdel-Rahman R, Franklin CS, Pericic M, et al.
(2008) Runs of homozygosity in European populations. Am J Hum Genet 83:
359–372. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.08.007.

20. Barac´ L, Pericic´ M, Klaric´ IM, Rootsi S, Janic´ijevic´ B, et al.

(2003) Y
chromosomal heritage of Croatian population and its island isolates. Eur J Hum
Genet 11: 535–542. doi:10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200992.

21. Rudan I, Campbell H, Rudan P (1999) Genetic epidemiological studies of
eastern Adriatic Island isolates, Croatia: objective and strategies. Collegium
Antropologicum 23: 531–46. doi:10646227.

22. Vitart V, Biloglav Z, Hayward C, Janicijevic B, Smolej-Narancic N, et al. (2006)
3000 years of solitude: extreme differentiation in the island isolates of Dalmatia,
Croatia. Eur J Hum Genet 14: 478–87. doi:5201589.

23. Pattaro C, Marroni F, Riegler A, Mascalzoni D, Pichler I, et al. (2007) The
genetic study of three population microisolates in South Tyrol (MICROS): study
design and epidemiological perspectives. BMC Med Genet 8: 29. doi:1471-
2350-8-29.

24. Aulchenko Y, Heutink P, Mackay I, Bertoli-Avella AM, Pullen J, et al. (2004)
Linkage disequilibrium in young genetically isolated Dutch population.
Eur J Hum Genet 12: 527–34. doi:15054401.

26.

25. Friedewald WT, Levy RI, Fredrickson DS (1972) Estimation of

the
concentration of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in plasma, without use of
the preparative ultracentrifuge. Clin Chem 18: 499–502.
Johansson I, Hallmans G, Wikman A, Biessy C, Riboli E, et al. (2002) Validation
and calibration of food-frequency questionnaire measurements in the Northern
Sweden Health and Disease cohort. Public Health Nutr 5: 487–96. doi:10.1079/
PHNPHN2001315.

27. Tobin MD, Sheehan NA, Scurrah KJ, Burton PR (2005) Adjusting for treatment
effects in studies of quantitative traits: antihypertensive therapy and systolic
blood pressure. Stat Med 24: 2911–2935. doi:10.1002/sim.2165.

28. Chen W, Abecasis GR (2007) Family-based association tests for genomewide

association scans. Am J Hum Genet 81: 913–926. doi:10.1086/521580.

29. Proschan MA, Waclawiw MA (2000) Practical guidelines
adjustment in clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 21: 527–539.

for multiplicity

30. R Development Core Team (2006) R: A language and environment

for

statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing.

31. Aulchenko Y, Ripke S, Isaacs A, van Duijn C (2007) GenABEL: an R library for

genome-wide association analysis. Bioinformatics 23: 1294–6. doi:btm108.

16. Dullaart RPF, Sluiter WJ (2008) Common variation in the CETP gene and the
implications for cardiovascular disease and its treatment: an updated analysis.
Pharmacogenomics 9: 747–763. doi:10.2217/14622416.9.6.747.

32. Smedley D, Haider S, Ballester B, Holland R, London D, et al. (2009) BioMart -
biological queries made easy. BMC Genomics 10: 22. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-
10-22.

PLoS Genetics | www.plosgenetics.org

10

January 2010 | Volume 6 |

Issue 1 | e1000798

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddp428
Advance Access published on September 10, 2009

4677–4687

Genome-wide signiﬁcant predictors of metabolites
in the one-carbon metabolism pathway
Aditi Hazra1,2,, Peter Kraft1, Ross Lazarus2,3, Constance Chen1, Stephen J. Chanock4,
Paul Jacques5, Jacob Selhub5 and David J. Hunter1,2

1Program in Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, 677
Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA, 2Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA, 3Department of Ambulatory
Care and Prevention, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 4Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), National Cancer Institute(NCI), US National Institutes of Health
(NIH), Bethesda, MD 20892, USA and 5Vitamin Metabolism and Aging Laboratory and Nutritional Epidemiology
Program, Jean Mayer US Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University,
Boston, MA 02111, USA

Received May 21, 2009; Revised and Accepted September 4, 2009

Low plasma B-vitamin levels and elevated homocysteine have been associated with cancer, cardiovascular
disease and neurodegenerative disorders. Common variants in FUT2 on chromosome 19q13 were associated
with plasma vitamin B12 levels among women in a genome-wide association study in the Nurses’ Health
Study (NHS) NCI-Cancer Genetic Markers of Susceptibility (CGEMS) project. To identify additional loci
associated with plasma vitamin B12, homocysteine, folate and vitamin B6 (active form pyridoxal 50-phosphate,
PLP), we conducted a meta-analysis of three GWA scans (total n 5 4763, consisting of 1658 women in NHS-
CGEMS, 1647 women in Framingham-SNP-Health Association Resource (SHARe) and 1458 men in SHARe).
On chromosome 19q13, we conﬁrm the association of plasma vitamin B12 with rs602662 and rs492602 (P-
value 5 1.83 3 10215 and 1.30 3 10214, respectively) in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) with rs601338
(P 5 6.92 3 10215), the FUT2 W143X nonsense mutation. We identiﬁed additional genome-wide signiﬁcant
loci for plasma vitamin B12 on chromosomes 6p21 (P 5 4.05 3 10208), 10p12 (P-value52.87 3 1029) and
11q11 (P-value52.25 3 10210) in genes with biological relevance. We conﬁrm the association of the well-
studied functional candidate SNP 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) Ala222Val (dbSNP
ID: rs1801133; P-value51.27 3 1028), on chromosome 1p36 with plasma homocysteine and identify an
additional genome-wide signiﬁcant locus on chromosome 9q22 (P-value52.06 3 1028) associated with
plasma homocysteine. We also identiﬁed genome-wide associations with variants on chromosome 1p36
with plasma PLP (P-value51.40 3 10215). Genome-wide signiﬁcant loci were not identiﬁed for plasma
folate. These data reveal new biological candidates and conﬁrm prior candidate genes for plasma homocys-
teine, plasma vitamin B12 and plasma PLP.

INTRODUCTION

One-carbon metabolism comprises a network of biochemical
reactions involved in the transfer of single-carbon moieties
essential for purine and thymidylate synthesis necessary for
maintenance of genomic integrity and remethylation of homo-
cysteine for S-adenosylmethionine (SAM)-dependent DNA

methylation reactions (1,2). Folate, a B-complex nutrient
from diet and supplements, donates methyl groups to generate
methionine from homocysteine. Plasma homocysteine (Hcy),
an integrated marker of one-carbon metabolism, is inversely
related to folate, vitamin B6 (3) and vitamin B12 and positively
related to high alcohol consumption (4,5). Vitamin B12 is a
necessary co-factor for the methionine synthase catalyzed

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: þ1 6175252035; Fax: þ1 6175252008; Email: ahazra@hsph.harvard.edu


# The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org

4678

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

remethylation of Hcy into methionine. The biologically active
form of vitamin B6, pyridoxal 50-phosphate (PLP), catalyzes
Hcy transulfuration (6) and is involved in over 100 enzyme
reactions in the synthesis and catabolism of neurotransmitters
(7), amino acids, glycogen and lipids (8).

Epidemiologic studies have shown that

individuals with
reduced intake of
folate (found in fruits, vegetables and
legumes) or vitamin B6 (found in poultry, ﬁsh, meat, legumes,
nuts and potatoes) or vitamin B12 [found in liver, shellﬁsh, ﬁsh,
poultry, eggs and dairy products (9)] have an inverse relationship
with Hcy levels. The accumulation of Hcy leads to an intracellular
increase in S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) and is an estab-
lished risk predictor of cardiovascular diseases (6,10– 16). In
addition,
individuals with inadequate intake of folate and
vitamin B12 are at an elevated risk of uracil misincorporation
into DNA and aberrant DNA methylation (17–20). Vitamin
B12 deﬁciency (21), related to poor intestinal B12 absorption (9)
or dietary deﬁciency, can lead to inactivation of methionine
synthase and is associated with pernicious anemia (22), cardio-
vascular disease (23– 25), cancer (26–32) and neurodegenerative
disorders (5,33–35). Plasma PLP levels are signiﬁcantly inver-
sely associated with risk of colorectal cancer in men (36) and
women (37).

Plasma Hcy is the integrated marker of the one-carbon
metabolism pathway, with a heritability estimate of 44%
(38)
[heritability estimate range 8 – 57% (38 – 43)]. Until
recently, common genetic variations reported to inﬂuence
plasma folate, vitamin PLP, vitamin B12 and Hcy were
focused on genes in the one-carbon metabolism pathway,
speciﬁcally the Ala222Val polymorphism (23,44) (45) in
5,10 methylene-THF reductase (MTHFR), associated with
reduced conversion of methylene-THF to methyl-THF
(46,47). We previously identiﬁed a genome-wide signiﬁcant
association between common variants in FUT2 and plasma
vitamin B12 levels in women (48). In a recent genome-wide
analysis of data pooled from three genome-wide association
study (GWASs) of 2931 persons and a replication study of
687 participants, Tanaka et al. (49) conﬁrmed this loci and
reported additional loci that met genome-wide signiﬁcance cri-
teria for PLP. In the current study, we report a meta-analysis
of three GWASs with 4763 participants (1658 women in
CGEMS, 1647 women in SHARe and 1458 men in SHARe)
and test for the association between 2 404 675 genotyped or
imputed SNPs with an R-sq . 0.3 (R-sq_hat estimates the
squared correlation between imputed and true genotypes and
allows us to assess imputation accuracy for markers with
many different allele frequencies) in each study and plasma
levels of Hcy, folate, vitamin B12 and PLP.

RESULTS
Genome-wide signiﬁcant associations of P-value , 5  1028
[corresponding to P , 0.05 corrected P-value after adjusting
for approximately 1 million independent loci (50)] were ident-
iﬁed in meta-analyses for
log-transformed plasma Hcy,
vitamin B12 and PLP. Age and the distributions of plasma
vitamin B12 and homocysteine in the study populations are
described in Table 1. As expected, plasma Hcy was found to
be inversely related to plasma levels of folate, vitamin B12

Table 1. Mean and median plasma one-carbon metabolite levels in the NHS
CGEMS, SHARe Women and SHARe Men study populations with GW data

NHS CGEMSa,
n ¼ 1,658

SHARe Women,

Exam 6b, n ¼ 1,647

Age, Mean, SD 58.92, 6.20
Plasma HCYc,
11.52, 5.41

58.60,9.71
9.06, 3.87

SHARe Men,
Exam 6b,
n ¼ 1,458

58.57, 9.70
10.54, 3.99

Mean, SD
Plasma HCY

Median
(IQRd)

Plasma Folatee,

Mean, SD

10.62 (4.04)

8.39 (3.32)

9.82 (3.55)

10.02, 9.03

7.85, 5.32

6.54, 4.23

Plasma Folate

7.69. (7.44)

6.45 (5.80)

5.68 (4.22)

Median
(IQRd)
f
Plasma B12

,
Mean, SD

Plasma B12

median
(IQRd)

Plasma PLPg,
Mean, SD
Plasma PLP

median
(IQRd)

473.90, 249.53

435.10, 181.80

398.59, 148.26

436.31 (224.0)

405.96 (211.91)

377.34 (172.68)

76.39, 90.55

83.14, 82.76

86.89, 84.05

46.70 (47.77)

57.55 (56.87)

61.72 (52.61)

aNHS blood collection was during 1989– 1990.
bExam 6 refers to Framingham Heart Study laboratory exam 6 measurements
(1995 – 1998). For all plasma, one-carbon metabolites exam 6 measurements
were used in this analysis because this exam had the largest sample size, and
laboratory measurements were conducted using assays comparable to NHS
CGEMS.
cPlasma HCY measured in mmol/l; data were log-transformed for GWAS
analysis.
dIQR, interquartile range.
ePlasma Folate measure in ng/ml; data were log-transformed for GWAS
analysis.
fPlasma Vitamin B12 measured in pg/ml; data were log-transformed for GWAS
analysis.
gPlasma PLP measured in pmol/ml; data were log-transformed for GWAS
analysis.

and vitamin B6 in our study population (Supplementary
Material, Table S1). No signiﬁcant heterogeneity by sex or
by study (Table 2) was detected for the genome-wide signiﬁ-
cant associations.

Plasma homocysteine

The well-studied functional polymorphism in MTHFR
Ala222Val (also reported as MTHFR C677T), rs1801133, on
chromosome 1 [position (bp): 11,790,644] was associated

with plasma Hcy (P-value ¼ 1.27  1028; Fig. 1A; Table 2).

Participants with the Ala/Ala (G/G) variant had lower plasma
Hcy levels than variant carriers. Two other SNPs, rs12085006
[position (bp): 11,892,989] and rs1999594 [position (bp):
11,893,482], located 102 kb from MTHFR, had stronger associ-
ations with plasma Hcy (5.81  10210 and 6.24  10210,
respectively; Fig. 1A; Table 2). Participants homozygous for
the rs12085006 G and rs1999594 A alleles had higher Hcy
levels compared with variant carriers for each SNP. The
rs12085006 A allele is correlated with the MTHFR 222Val

allele (composite r2 ¼ 0.53; P , 0.0001) (51). After mutual

t
e
h
-
P

2
7

.

0

2
7
0

.

5
6
0

.

6
3
0

.

3
2
0

.

8
0
0

.

6
0

.

0

1
8

.

0

2
8
0

.

8
0
0

.

8
0

.

0

0
1
–
E
1
8

.

5

0
1
–
E
4
2

.

6

8
0
–
E
7
2

.

1

8
0
–
E
6
0

.

2

5
1
–
E
3
8

.

1

5
1
–
E
2
9

.

6

4
1
–
E
0
3

.

1

9
0
–
E
7
8
2

.

0
1
–
E
5
2

.

2

8
0
–
E
5
0

.

4

8
0
–
E
1
9
4

.

0
7
0

.

7
6

.

0

2
8

.

0

0
1

.

2

3
8

.

2

3
1

.

5

3
4
5

.

2
4

.

0

5
4

.

0

8
4

.

5

5
4

.

5

1
0

.

0

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0
0

.

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

4
0
0

.

4
0

.

0

4
0

.

0

6
0

.

0
2

7
0

.

0
2

.

5
0
0
2

5
0

.

0
2

4
0

.

0
2

.

4
0
0
2

6
0

.

0

6
0
0

.

4
0
2
E
9
4
6

.

4
0
2
E
9
4

.

6

4
0
–
E
1
5
1

.

4
0
–
E
2
9

.

2

4
0
–
E
0
8

.

2

4
0
–
E
2
0
4

.

4
0
–
E
6
3

.

2

4
0
–
E
6
5
3

.

4
0
–
E
4
6

.

1

7
0
–
E
6
9

.

3

7
0
–
E
1
7
3

.

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

2
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

2
0

.

0

2
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

4
0

.

0

4
0

.

0

4
0

.

0

7
0

.

0
2

5
0

.

0
2

5
0

.

0
2

6
0

.

0
2

7
0

.

0
2

7
0

.

0
2

5
0

.

0

5
0

.

0

3
0
2
E
6
0

.

4

3
0
2
E
6
0

.

4

3
0
2
E
9
5

.

9

2
0
2
E
5
8

.

4

4
0
2
E
0
8

.

3

3
0
2
E
3
6

.

2

3
0
2
E
9
8

.

5

3
0
2
E
2
3

.

6

5
0
2
E
9
6

.

6

2
0
2
E
7
8

.

1

2
0
2
E
6
2

.

2

6
4
0

.

2
1

.

0

5
1
–
E
0
4

.

1

1
1
–
E
0
3
4

.

6
5

.

1

3
6

.

5

2
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

4
1

.

0
2

.

0
1
0
2

7
0
–
E
6
3

.

2

6
0
–
E
1
2
2

.

3
0

.

0

2
0

.

0

6
1

.

0
2

2
1

.

0
2

4
0
2
E
7
3

.

2

2
0
2
E
2
3

.

7

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

1
0

.

0

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

1
0

.

0

2
0

.

0

2
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

3
0
0

.

3
0
0

.

3
0

.

0

3
0

.

0

3
0

.

0

4
0

.

0
2

5
0

.

0
2

4
0

.

0
2

6
0

.

0
2

3
0

.

0
2

3
0

.

0
2

5
0

.

0

4
0

.

0

5
0
2
E
1
2
1

.

5
0
2
E
2
3
1

.

4
0
2
E
2
1

.

5

5
0
2
E
2
9

.

4

0
1
2
E
9
0

.

3

1
1
2
E
5
2

.

4

1
1
2
E
9
3

.

5

5
0
2
E
4
0

.

9

3
0
2
E
7
2

.

1

2
0
2
E
7
2

.

4

2
0
2
E
7
2

.

4

1
1

.

0
2

5
0

.

0
2

7
0
2
E
4
4

.

6

6
0
2
E
0
4

.

1

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

2
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

1
0
0

.

3
0
0

.

3
0
0

.

4
0
0

.

4
0
0

.

4
0

.

0

8
0

.

0
2

8
0

.

0
2

5
0

.

0
2

5
0

.

0
2

3
0

.

0
2

3
0

.

0
2

9
0

.

0

9
0

.

0

5
1

.

0
2

2
1

.

0
2

3
4
0

.

3
4

.

0

3
3

.

0

2
2

.

0

4
4

.

0

5
4

.

0

4
4

.

0

8
2

.

0

7
2

.

0

5
3

.

0

5
3

.

0

1
2

.

0

8
4

.

0

,

A
G

G
A

,

A
G

,

,

T
C

G
A

,

A
G

,

G
A

,

A
G

,

G
A

,

,

T
C

,

C
G

G
A

,

C
T

,

R
F
H
T
M

1
5
R
P
G

2
T
U
F

2
T
U
F

2
T
U
F

N
B
U
C

1
N
C
T

T
U
M

T
U
M

9
8
9
2
9
8
1
1

2
8
4
3
9
8
1
1

4
4
6
0
9
7
1
1

1
9
8
2
0
2
8
9

7
9
7
8
9
8
3
5

6
8
4
8
9
8
3
5

9
2
2
8
9
8
3
5

7
5
1
6
9
1
7
1

9
6
0
0
9
3
9
5

2
9
3
0
2
5
9
4

6
4
4
7
1
5
9
4

6
3
p
1

6
3
p
1

6
3
p
1

2
2
q
9

6
0
0
5
8
0
2
1
s
r

4
9
5
9
9
9
1
s
r

3
3
1
1
0
8
1
s
r

8
1
0
6
8
9
0
1
s
r

e
n
i
e
t
s
y
c
o
m
o
h

a
m
s
a
l
P

2
1
B
n
i
m
a
t
i

V
a
m
s
a
l
P

3
1
q
9
1

3
1
q
9
1

3
1
q
9
1

2
1
p
0
1

1
1
q
1
1

1
2
p
6

1
2
p
6

2
6
6
2
0
6
s
r

8
3
3
1
0
6
s
r

2
0
6
2
9
4
s
r

2
2
2
1
0
8
1
s
r

e
8
5
5
3
7
4
9
s
r

4
3
9
6
2
5
s
r

5
5
5
3
7
4
9
s
r

P
L
P

a
m
s
a
l
P

3
F
P
B
N

L
P
L
A

2
9
6
5
3
6
1
2

4
7
3
1
3
5
1
2

6
3
p
1

6
3
p
1

5
3
3
6
5
2
1
s
r

8
4
7
4
5
6
4
s
r

c
a
t
e
m
-
P

Q

.

E
S

.

A
T
E
B

e
u
l
a
v
-
P

.

E
S

.

3
6
7
4
¼
n

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a
-
a
t
e
M

8
5
4
1
¼
n

n
e
M
e
R
A
H
S

b
A
T
E
B

7
4
6
1
¼
n

n
e
m
o
W

e
u
l
a
v
-
P

.

E
S

.

e
R
A
H
S

b
A
T
E
B

8
5
6
1
¼
n

S
M
E
G
C
S
H
N

e
u
l
a
v
-
P

.

E
S

.

a

A
T
E
B

d
F
A
M

s
e
l
e
l
l

A

e
n
e
G

)
p
b
(

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
P

r
h
C

P
N
S

s
e
t
i
l
o
b
a
t
e
m
n
o
b
r
a
c
-
e
n
o

a
m
s
a
l
p

r
o
f

s
n
o
i
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a

t
n
a
c
ﬁ
i
n
g
i
s

e
d
i
w
-
e
m
o
n
e
G

.
2

e
l
b
a
T

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

4679

adjustment in a univariate regression model, both rs1285006
and MTHFR Ala222Val remained nominally statistically sig-

niﬁcantly associated with plasma Hcy (P ¼ 0.02 and 0.002,

respectively). Variant carriers of both MTHFR 222Val and the
A allele for rs12085006 had higher levels of plasma Hcy com-
pared with non-carriers. Similar results were obtained for
rs1999594. We also identiﬁed an association on chromosome
9 in the gamma-aminobutyric acid B-type receptor G-protein
coupled receptor 51 (GPR51) gene, rs10986018, with plasma

Hcy (P-value¼2.06  1028; Fig. 1A, Table 2). A SNP,
rs11041321 in SYT9, reported by Tanaka et al. (49) with a
P-value of 1.11  1024 in their joint analysis of GWAS
meta-analysis and replication study, had a P-value¼0.44 in

our meta-analysis data. The SNPs in CBS, CPS1, MUT and
NOX4 reported in the Women’s Genome Health Study by
Pare´ et al. (52) were not genome-wide signiﬁcant in our
plasma
CBS:
P-value¼6.30  1021; rs7422339 in CPS1: P-value¼4.18 
10-4; rs4267943 in MUT: P-value 6.43  1021; rs11018628
in NOX4: P-value¼4.35  1023).

homocysteine

(rs6586282

data

in

Plasma folate

Overall, there were no genome-wide signiﬁcant associations
for plasma folate in the meta-analysis (Fig. 1B). The strongest
associations were in chromosome 2 in the FIGN gene,
and

rs982393 (P-value¼8.36  1028; data not
rs2119289 (P-value¼1.03  1027; data not shown). Although
MTHFR was observed (rs3737965, P-value¼6.90  1025;

not genome-wide signiﬁcant, a moderate signal for SNPs in

shown)

data not shown). As expected (53), the MTHFR Ala222Val
variant carriers had lower plasma folate compared with the

Ala/Ala variant (MTHFR Ala222Val P-value¼1.14  1023

from meta-analysis, data not shown). The composite linkage
disequilibrium (LD) with MTHFR Ala222Val and rs3737965
was 0.15 in our data. The rs1999594 SNP associated with
plasma folate in the report by Tanaka et al.
(49) had

P-value¼3.01  1023 in our analysis for plasma folate. The

rs153734 SNP in the PRICKLE gene, reported by Tanaka
et al. (49), was not associated with plasma folate in these

data (P-value¼0.44).

Plasma vitamin B12

Genome-wide signiﬁcant associations were identiﬁed on
chromosomes 6, 10, 11 and 19 for plasma vitamin B12
(Fig. 1C; Table 2). Two SNPs, in LD, in Methylmalonyl-CoA
mutase (MUT) on chromosome 6p21—rs9473558 SNP and
rs9473555 [chromosome position (bp): 49,520,392 and
49,517,446, respectively]—were genome-wide signiﬁcant in
the meta-analysis for plasma vitamin B12 (P-meta¼4.91 
1028, 4.05  1028 respectively, Fig. 1; Table 2). Participants
homozygous for the rs9473558 C and rs9473555 G alleles had
higher B12 levels compared with participants homozygous for
the major allele. We identiﬁed an association (P ¼ 2.87 
1029; Fig. 1C; Table 2) between rs1801222 in CUBN
(Cubilin) on chromosome 10p12 and plasma vitamin B12
levels in the meta-analysis of 4763 participants. The SNP is
in exon 8 of CUBN and codes for an amino acid change
Ser253Phe [chromosome 10p position (bp): 17,196,157].

.

1
0
0
0
,

.

s
i

e
c
n
a
i
r
a
v

y
d
u
t
s

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

;
l
e
d
o
m

s
t
c
e
f
f
e
-
d
e
x
ﬁ

e
h
t

g
n
i
s
u

d
e
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c

e
r
e
w
s
t
e
s

a
t
a
d

n
e
M
e
R
A
H
S

d
n
a

n
e
m
o
W

e
R
A
H
S

S
H
F

,

S
M
E
G
C
S
H
N
e
h
t

r
o
f

s
e
u
l
a
v
-
P
d
n
a

s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a
-
a
t
e
M

.
s
l
e
v
e
l

e
t
i
l
o
b
a
t
e
m
d
e
m
r
o
f
s
n
a
r
t
-
g
o
l

g
n
i
s
u

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
i

p
i
h
s
n
i
k

g
n
i
s
u

l
e
d
o
m

s
t
c
e
f
f
e
-
d
e
x
i
m

r
a
e
n
i
l

m
o
r
f

e
r
a

a
t
a
d

e
R
A
H
S

s
e
t
a
m

.
s
l
e
v
e
l

e
t
i
l
o
b
a
t
e
m
d
e
m
r
o
f
s
n
a
r
t
-
g
o
l

g
n
i
s
u

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
r

r
a
e
n
i
l

m
o
r
f

e
r
a

a
t
a
d

S
M
E
G
C
S
H
N

r
o
f

s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
E
a

i
t
s
E
b

c

d

.
)
8
9
7
9
(

,

g
r
A
2
3
5
s
i
H
1
2
3
1
4
1
1
s
r

h
t
i

w
d
e
g
r
e
m
n
e
e
b

s
a
h

8
5
5
3
7
4
9
s
r

D

I

P
N
S
b
d
e

.
s
e
i
d
u
t
s
A
W
G
e
e
r
h
t

e
h
t

s
s
o
r
c
a

d
e
g
a
r
e
v
a

s
i

F
A
M

4680

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

Figure 1. Meta-analysis of three GWA scans for plasma one-carbon metabolites. Manhattan plot of genome-signiﬁcant associations (deﬁned as P ¼ 5  1028
and depicted by the grey dashed line) for plasma homocysteine (A), plasma vitamin B12 (C) and plasma PLP (D) in a meta-analysis of participants from NHS
CGEMS, Framingham SHARe Women and Framingham SHARe Men.

levels. The meta-analysis

Participants homozygous for the rs1801222 G allele had
higher B12
indicated several
signals in the P , 1025 range for other SNPs in CUBN and
on chromosome 10p15 in the neighboring TRDMT1 gene
(DNMT2), which may be explained by LD. A genome-wide
signiﬁcant association was also observed for rs526934 in the
transcobalamin I
located on chromosome 11q11 [position (bp): 59,390,069].
Variant carriers of the rs526934 G allele had lower vitamin
B12 levels when compared with individuals with the homozy-
gous AA variant.

(TCN1) gene P-value¼2.25  10210)

(P-value¼1.83  10215; Fig. 1C; Table 2) was for

The most signiﬁcant association in the meta-analysis data
the
rs602662 SNP in FUT2. The FUT2 nonsense SNP W143X,
rs601338 [chromosome 19q13 position (bp): 53,898,486],
the determinant of FUT2 secretor status, was the second

most signiﬁcant association with a P-value¼6.92  10215.

Participants homozygous
for non-secretor variants had
higher B12 levels than carriers of the secretor genotype. The
rs492602 SNP reported to be in high LD (D0 ¼ 1, r2 ¼ 0.76)
with FUT2 W143X had a P-value¼1.30  10214. We noted

these associations despite the fact that the FUT2 SNPs were
not well tagged in the 347 458 genotyped SNPs that passed
Quality Control ﬁlters in the SHARe data set; the MACH
imputation R-sq value for
rs602662: was 0.45, and for
rs492602 it was 0.41 in SHARe.

Plasma PLP

SNPs in alkaline phosphatase, ALPL, had genome-wide sig-
niﬁcant associations with plasma PLP in the meta-analysis.
We observed the
rs1256335

(P-value¼1.40  10215; Fig. 1D; Table 2) in the ALPL

strongest

association for

gene. Participants homozygous for the A allele had higher
plasma PLP levels compared with carriers of the G allele.
The reported rs4654748 (49) SNP in NBPF3, upstream of

ALPL, had a P-value¼4.30  10211 with plasma PLP in
these data (composite r2 for rs1256335 and rs4654748 is
0.16, P , 0.0001).

DISCUSSION

We identiﬁed genome-wide signiﬁcant associations for plasma
homocysteine, plasma vitamin B12 and plasma PLP. SNPs in
chromosome 6p21, 10p12, 11q11 and 19q13 showed strong
signals for plasma vitamin B12. SNPs in chromosomes 1p36
and 9q22 were strongly associated with plasma homocysteine.
We identiﬁed genome-wide signiﬁcant associations between
SNPs in chromosome 1p36 and plasma PLP.

Plasma homocysteine

Chromosome 1p36. MTHFR is a key enzyme required for
DNA synthesis that catalyzes the irreversible transformation

of 5,10-MTHF into 5-MTHF (54). The TT variant alleles of
the well-known MTHFR 677 (amino acid change: MTHFR
Ala222Val) polymorphism are related to a 30% reduction in
enzyme activity (55). A decrease in MTHFR activity associ-
ated with the 222 Val/Val (677TT) polymorphism shifts the
folate pool, leading to an elevation in 5,10-methyleneTHF.
The MTHFR Ala222Val SNP results in a moderate (up to
15 – 19%) increase in mean Hcy levels between the Ala/Ala
and Val/Val variants (23), and this effect is greatly attenuated
in those individuals with mid-range to high folate levels (56).
Rs12085006 and rs1999594, located 102 kb from MTHFR,
had an even stronger association with plasma Hcy in our
meta-analysis. RS1999594 had a genome-wide signiﬁcant

association (P ¼ 8.5  10212) with plasma Hcy in the

Women’s Genome Health Study (WGHS), but only
rs180133 showed evidence for non-additive effects (52). The
rs1999594 SNP was reported by Tanaka et al. (49) to be
associated with plasma folate in a meta-analysis of 2931 par-

ticipants (P ¼ 1.12  1027), although the association did not

reach genome-wide signiﬁcance in their report on plasma
folate and was not reported for plasma Hcy. Given the
strong correlation between rs1999594 (or rs12085006) and
rs180133 and the modest evidence for association between
rs1999594 (or rs12085006) and plasma Hcy after adjusting
for MTHFR Ala222Val, we cannot conclude that these two
SNPs mark distinct loci associated with plasma Hcy.

Chromosome 9q22. We identiﬁed a genome-wide signiﬁcant
association between plasma Hcy and a variant in GPR51. Car-
riers of the rs10986018 T allele had lower plasma vitamin B12
compared with carriers of the CC variant. Expression of
GPR51 may be regulated by nicotine (57). Epidemiologic
studies have reported increased homocysteine levels
in
smokers compared with non-smokers (58 – 62). The associ-
ation with plasma Hcy and rs10986018 warrants future
study on plasma Hcy and effect modiﬁcation by smoking
status.

Plasma folate

We did not identify any genome-wide signiﬁcant association
with plasma folate in this meta-analysis, although the
MTHFR Ala222Val variant had the expected direction of
association (53,56), with a modest P-value. FHS SHARe
Exam 6 data available in dbGaP had the largest sample size
for all four plasma one-carbon metabolites and laboratory
assays comparable to the NHS CGEMS study population.
All NHS CGEMS participants had plasma folate measured
on blood drawn prior to folic acid fortiﬁcation (1989 – 1990).
However,
the Framingham SHARe laboratory exam 6
measurements were taken during 1995 – 1998. While the
majority of the SHARe participants included in this analysis
had measurements prior to the US mandate for folic acid for-
tiﬁcation in 1998, evidence suggests that the fortiﬁcation may
have started in 1996 – 1997. Pre-fortiﬁcation plasma folate
levels in the prior Framingham SHARe laboratory exam,
available in dbGaP, were measured using a microbial assay
and would not be equivalent to the HPLC assay used in the
NHS CGEMS data. We also recognize that there may also
be misclassiﬁcation due to folic acid supplementation.

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

4681

Plasma vitamin B12

in the mitochondria,

Chromosome 6. MUT, located on chromosome 6p21, encodes
the mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl Coenzyme A (CoA)
mutase. MUT requires
5-prime-deoxyadenosylcobalamin
(AdoCbl, a coenzyme form of vitamin B12) to catalyze the iso-
merization of L-methylmalonyl – coenzyme A (CoA)
to
succinyl-CoA,
independent of folate
status. Mutations in methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, especially
in the C-terminus, result in methylmalonic aciduria (63 – 67).
A patient with the mut(-) MMA phenotype due to the MUT
Gly717Val variant was also homozygous for the His532Arg
(rs9473558) polymorphism (68). The T variant of rs9473558
has reduced vitamin B12 levels in our data and may be associ-
ated with decreased conversion of methylmalonyl CoA to suc-
cinyl CoA. The rs9473558 SNP in MUT was associated with
in the Women’s
Genome Health Study (WGHS) participants
(52). The
rs9473558 SNP was positively associated with plasma homo-

plasma homocysteine (P ¼ 2.1  10 – 7)

cysteine in the WGHS study (b¼ 0.020), but inversely associ-
ated with plasma vitamin B12
(b¼ 20.04), which is consistent with the inverse relationship
between homocysteine and vitamin B12. The expression of
MUT was associated with the rs9473555 SNP with a LOD
score ¼ 7.095 [enzyme activity for the G-allele is reduced

in our meta-analysis

by 0.42 standard deviation; mRNA by SNP browser 1-0-1
database (69)]. The preliminary association with rs9473558
or rs9473555 in the MUT gene and plasma vitamin B12
should be replicated in other studies. Future studies on the
relationship of
rs9473558 and MUT gene
expression is warranted.

rs9473555 or

Chromosome 10. Cubilin (CUBN) is located on chromosome
10p12.31. The 460 kd multiligand hydrophobic CUBN
protein binds to intrinsic factor-cobalamin (Cbl-IF) complexes
with a high afﬁnity and is expressed in both kidney and ileal
epithelial cells. Mutations in CUBN are associated with mega-
loblastic anemia and characterized by selective intestinal
vitamin B12 malabsorption (70). The P1297L mutation in
CUBN causes a 5-fold decrease of the binding domain afﬁnity
for Cbl-IF (the IF-Cbl binding region includes amino acids
928 – 1386). The rs1801222 (Ser253Phe) variant was associ-
ated with lower vitamin B12 levels in this study and may
decrease the binding and transport of vitamin B12 in the
ileum. Another SNP in CUBN reported by Tanaka et al. (49)
with a P-value of 1.11  1026, rs11254363, had a P-value
of 8.65  1025 in our meta-analysis. The neighboring gene,
located on 10p15.1 is a methyltransferase that
TRDMT1,
methylates
acid transfer RNA molecule
(tRNA(Asp))
(71). A recent study on spina biﬁda and
folate-related genes reported an association for different
SNPs in CUBN and TRDMT1 with increased serum RBC
folate levels in controls (72). Further research is warranted
to understand the LD pattern across the 305.3 kb CUBN
gene and the cis relationships of the genome-wide signiﬁcant
SNPs with CUBN and TRDMT1.

aspartic

the

Chromosome 11. TCN1, on chromosome 11q11, is a vitamin
B12 binding protein that promotes the cellular uptake of
vitamin B12 by receptor-mediated endocytosis. The protein

4682

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

is a major constituent of secondary granules in neutrophils and
facilitates the transport of cobalamin into cells (73). The
rs526934
meta-analysis and replication joint P-value for

from Tanaka et al., was P-value¼1.51  1026. The TCN1

rs526934 G variant may reduce transport of cobalamin, result-
ing in lower plasma vitamin B12 levels.

Chromosome 19. We previously reported an association with
variants in FUT2 on chromosome 19q13 and plasma vitamin
B12
rs492602:
P-value¼5.36  10217 in the combined NHS CGEMS and

P-value¼3.52  10215;

[rs602662:

colorectal neoplasia data sets; (48)]. In the SHARe women
and the SHARe men data sets, we replicated our genome-wide
rs602662 (SHARe combined P ¼
signiﬁcant ﬁnding for
5.07  1028; Table 2 presents separate estimates and standard
error, by SHARe Men and Women) and in this meta-analysis
of CGEMS and SHARe data, we conﬁrm the association of
these SNPs with plasma vitamin B12. In this study of plasma
vitamin B12, we conﬁrm our previously reported hypothesis
that FUT2 W143X, a nonsense mutation (74) and determinant
of FUT2 secretor status, is the causal variant for the associ-

ation with plasma B12 levels (rs601338: P-value¼6.92 
10215). Individuals with the non-secretor status variant had
higher plasma vitamin B12 levels compared with carriers of
the secretor status genotypes. Reduced vitamin B12 absorption
(75 – 79) in carriers of the secretor genotype may be a conse-
quence of susceptibility to H. pylori infection compared with
individuals with the non-secretor genotype. The association
with rs602662 was replicated by an independent group (49)
with a P-value of 2.43  10212 in a meta-analysis of three
GWASs (n ¼ 2930 participants).

Plasma PLP

Mutations in the ALPL gene, on chromosome 1p36, are associ-
ated with hypophosphatasia. Increased circulating concen-
trations of PLP in all clinical forms of hypophosphatasia
have been reported by Whyte et al. (80,81). The ﬁndings
suggested that
tissue-non-speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase is
involved in vitamin B6 metabolism. The ALPL enzyme may
function as an ectoenzyme to regulate extracellular concen-
trations of PLP (80). The rs1256335 G allele had lower
plasma PLP levels compared with the homozygous A allele,
possibly due to increased hydrolysis of PLP (82). The
rs4654748 C allele, in the neuroblastoma breakpoint family,
member 3, (NBPF3, alternate name AE2) gene had lower
plasma PLP levels compared with the homozygous major
allele.

Comparability of plasma phenotypes in the study
population

The NHS and FHS study populations have comparable metab-
olite levels for conducting a meta-analysis of GWA data of
plasma one-carbon metabolites and the biomarker measure-
ment in these studies were all done in a single laboratory.
However, one limitation is that the NHS CGEMS participants
were all postmenopausal women, whereas SHARe Women
participants
included of both pre- and postmenopausal
women. Plasma Hcy is lower in premenopausal women than

men, but after menopause, homocysteine levels in women
increased to approach those in men, consistent with our data.
All NHS and the majority of the FHS blood samples for par-
ticipants in this analysis were collected prior to the introduc-
tion of folic acid fortiﬁcation of breads, cereals, ﬂours, corn
meal, pasta products, rice and other cereal grain products
sold in the USA (83,84). Therefore, the genetic variability
signal should not be attenuated by this recent environmental
inﬂuence.

In summary, for plasma vitamin B12, we replicated our
ﬁnding for FUT2 (48) and identiﬁed genome-wide signiﬁcant
SNPs in biological candidate genes: TCN1, a vitamin B12
binding protein; MUT, which converts methylmalonyl CoA
to succinyl CoA; and CUBN, the receptor for intrinsic factor-
vitamin B12 complexes. For plasma homocysteine, we
observed genome-wide signiﬁcant associations with the
MTHFR functional SNP Ala222Val and a possible new inde-
pendent locus 102 kb upstream of MTHFR. For plasma PLP,
we noted genome-wide signiﬁcant associations in ALPL.
These data reveal new biological candidates and conﬁrm
prior candidate genes for plasma homocysteine, plasma
vitamin B12 and plasma PLP.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Ethics statement

All participants provided written informed consent, and local
institutional review boards approved the study protocols.

Study populations

We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide data in 1658
women genotyped with the HumanHap500 as part of the
Cancer Genetic Markers of Susceptibility Project (CGEMS)
and in 1682 women genotyped with the Affymetrix 500K
mapping array and the Affymetrix 50K Supplementary array
as a part of the SNP Health Association Resource (SHARe
data set, part of NHLBI FHS) to identify novel loci that inﬂu-
ence plasma one-carbon metabolite levels. All participants
were of self-reported European ancestry.

The Nurses’ Health Study (NHS)

histories

and

reporting medical

The NHS was initiated in 1976, when 121 700 US registered
nurses between the ages of 30 and 55 returned an initial ques-
tionnaire
baseline
health-related exposures. Every 2 years, follow-up question-
naires are mailed to the participants (questionnaire response
rate .90% for all follow-up cycles). Diet was assessed in
1986, 1990, 1994 and 1996 with a semiquantitative food fre-
quency questionnaire. Between 1989 and 1990, blood
samples and relevant sample collection information were col-
lected from 32 826 women.

The CGEMS project (http://www.cgems.cancer.gov) is an
NCI initiative to conduct genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) to identify genes involved in breast and prostate
cancer. The initial CGEMS scan, designed and funded only
to study the main effect of SNP variants on breast cancer
risk in postmenopausal women, has been completed (85).

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

4683

A subset of the participants in the CGEMS project also has
been assayed for plasma vitamin B12. The NHS CGEMS par-
ticipants had similar laboratory measurement of the plasma
one-carbon metabolites as well as host characteristics and
blood draw features (fasting status and year and month of
blood draw).

10 study samples (27,37). No signiﬁcant differences in mean
levels of plasma homocysteine, folate, vitamin B12 or PLP
were detected by breast cancer case – control status in the
NHS. The mean coefﬁcient of variation for 75 pairs of repli-
cate 6.5% for folate, 7.9% for homocysteine, 7.3% for B12
and 7.2% for PLP (27).

Framingham Heart Study (FHS)

The FHS began in 1948 with the enrollment of two-thirds of
the adult population of Framingham, Massachusetts (86),
including 2873 women aged 28 – 62 years. In 1971, 5124 off-
spring of the original cohort members and offspring spouses
were enrolled in the Framingham Heart Study,
including
2641 women ranging in age from 12 to 60 years. A data set
consisting of repeated and highly accurate measurements of
many different phenotypes collected over multiple exam bien-
nial cycles is available for each participant. The NHLBI Fra-
mingham SNP-Health Association Resource (SHARe) is a
large-scale GWAS on the FHS original, offspring and third-
generation cohorts with data accessible to the research com-
munity (87). In the Framingham cohort,
the SNP Health
Association Resource (SHARe) project genotyped 9274 Cau-
casian participants with the Affymetrix 500K mapping array
and the Affymetrix 50K supplemental array (Affymetrix,
Santa Clara, CA, USA). The 8508 samples from these partici-
pants had a sample call rate 97% (88,89). Of the participants
from the Framingham original and offspring cohorts, with
measured plasma one-carbon metabolites at laboratory exam
6, between 1995 and 1998, the SHARe scan included 1647
(16) Caucasian women and 1458 Caucasian men. Exam 6
had the largest sample size for all four plasma one-carbon
metabolites and laboratory assays comparable to the NHS
CGEMS study population.
Information on Framingham
SHARe
found at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000007.v1.p1.

can be

Laboratory assays

Plasma levels of homocysteine for both the NHS CGEMS and
FHS SHARe studies were measured by high-performance
liquid chromatography, with ﬂuorescence detection (90).
Plasma levels of
the NHS
CGEMS and FHS SHARe participants were measured using
by a radioassay kit (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasma PLP levels were
measured by an enzymatic procedure using radioactive tyro-
sine and the apo-enzyme tyrosine decarboxylase.

folate and vitamin B12 for

All assays were conducted at the Jean Mayer U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on
Aging at Tufts University. Plasma samples for matched
case – control sets were always positioned next to each other,
in random order, in boxes sent to the lab and were assessed
in the same batch to minimize the impact of laboratory error
due to batch drift. Quality control (QC) samples were also sub-
mitted with each batch and were randomly placed throughout
the boxes (two assay batches were used for NHS CGEMS par-
ticipants). Laboratory technicians were blinded to case, control
and QC status of the samples. QC samples consisted of repli-
cates of two pools of plasma. One QC sample was assayed per

Reliability of laboratory assays of plasma levels

In an analysis of 188 NHS participants, the correlation coefﬁ-
cients between folate intake calculated from the 1980 food fre-
quency questionnaire and erythrocyte folate concentrations in
1987 were 0.55 for folate from foods and supplementation and
0.38 for folate from food only (18). Similar correlation coefﬁ-
cients were noted for plasma folate (0.55 for total folate; 0.35
for dietary folate) (18,27). The intraclass correlation coefﬁ-
cient over a 3-year period on 82 participants was 0.63 for
plasma folate, suggesting reproducibility of these measure-
ments over time.

Ilumina SNP genotyping and quality-control analysis

Genotyping in the CGEMS project was carried out using the
Illumina Inﬁnium Sentrix HumanHap550 bead chip, which
contains 556 566 SNPs derived from the HapMap phase I
and II data (85). The polymorphisms on the bead chip are
selected to be direct surrogates (R2, a measure of pair-wise
SNP correlation, .0.8) of more than 75% of the common
polymorphisms genotyped as part of the HapMap Phase II
project. Overall, genotyping success was 98.45% of the poss-
ible genotypes in the ﬁrst attempt and 99.27% after failed
samples were repeated. Quality control of genotyping reprodu-
cibility was 99.99%. SNPs with signiﬁcant deviations from
Hardy – Weinberg (HWE) proportions (5% of SNPs at the

level of P ¼ 0.05 and 1.28% at P ¼ 0.01) were not excluded

from the analysis, as the tests for association applied to
these data are valid in the presence of departure from HW pro-
portions. The NHS cases and controls included in CGEMS are
of self-reported European ancestry (85). Four samples (three
cases and one control) were removed because of intercontinen-
tal admixture. In the CGEMS data, we saw no evidence for
systematic bias in the distribution of P-values for analyses
with and without further adjustment for residual population
structure using four principal components of genetic variation
compatible with no confounding of SNP-metabolite associ-
ations due to population stratiﬁcation (85,91). A total of
1658 NHS participants had GWAS and plasma vitamin B12
data.

Affymetrix SNP genotyping and quality-control analysis

Genotyping in the SHARe study (88,89) was carried out using
the Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA, USA) GeneChip Human
Mapping 500K mapping array and supplemental 50K
mapping array (HuGeneFocused50K) with gene-centric and
coding SNPs. The Human Mapping 500K Array Set is com-
prised of two arrays, each capable of genotyping on average
250 000 SNPs (approximately 262 000 for Nsp arrays and
238 000 for Sty arrays).

4684

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

Association analyses were restricted to individuals with
97% genotyping call-rate. SNP results were ﬁltered on
Hardy – Weinberg equilibrium P-value of 1  1026, SNP call-
rate of 95% and minor allele frequency (MAF) of 0.01. After
cleaning the genotype data, 347 K SNPs were available for the
analysis.

Statistical methods

We tested the association between log-transformed plasma
one-carbon metabolite levels and each SNP using linear
regression adjusted for age. SNP genotypes were coded as
counts of minor alleles (additive coding) unless otherwise
speciﬁed. We adopted an additive coding because it has
nearly optimal power for a range of realistic genetic models,
with the exception of rare recessive effects, which we have
little power to detect (92). In CGEMS, we further adjusted
for principal components of genetic variation, calculated
with the EIGENSTRAT software (91).

The SHARe data were analyzed using linear mixed effects
models to account for residual familial correlation; aside
from ﬁxed effects (age, SNP genotype), this model includes
individual random effects with a correlation matrix equal to
the kinship matrix times a scalar variance parameter. These
analyses were implemented using the lmekin function in the
R package kinship.

We imputed SNP genotypes using the hidden Markov
model
implemented in MACH 1.0 (http://www.sph.umich
.edu/csg/abecasis/MACH/index.html) for each CGEMS and
SHARe separately. For the SHARe data, the hidden Markov
model was trained using unrelated founders (922 women and
692 biologically unrelated men); the ﬁtted model was then
used to infer missing genotypes for the remaining subjects.
The certainty of the imputation is dependent on the stretches
of haplotypes shared between the reference panel (HapMap
Phase II CEU population) and the study population. The
imputation result at each of the imputed SNPs, per study par-
ticipant, can be expressed as a set of three genotype probabil-
ities, that vary between 0 and 1 per genotype and sum to 1, or
as an ‘allele dosage’, which is deﬁned as the expected number
of copies of the minor allele at each SNP and varies between 0
and 2. In the CGEMS data, we evaluated both methods and
obtained comparable results for the genotype probabilities
and allele dosage methods. In the SHARe data, we evaluated
both methods for the genome-wide signiﬁcant associations
and obtained comparable results for the genotype probabilities
and allele dosage methods.

Genotyped and imputed SNPs with an R-sq_hat from
MACH .0.30 in both the CGEMS Illumina and SHARe
Affymetrix data were used for a meta-analysis (93)
to
examine the association between 2.5million polymorphisms

and the plasma metabolites. A ﬁxed-effect model was used to
pool the results for the NHS CGEMS, SHARe Women and
SHARe Men studies. Cochran’s Q statistic and tau-squared
were used to test for between-study heterogeneity, and the
I-squared statistic to quantify the proportion of total variation
due to heterogeneity will be calculated (94). We saw no evi-
dence for systematic bias in the distribution of P-values
from the meta-analyses (Supplementary Material, Fig. S1).
The P-for-heterogeneity is reported in Table 2. SAS PROC

GLM was used to test the independence of the estimates of
multiple SNPs in a model. Composite LD was calculated
according to the notation of Weir (51).

Our analyses do not explicitly account for the ascertainment
of subjects on the basis of primary disease (breast cancer for
the NHS CGEMS; Framingham SHARe data are from a
cohort study and not ascertained on disease). This approach
is appropriate, since our loci of interest are not associated
with primary disease evaluated in the CGEMS NHS partici-
pants (85,95). All P-values are based on two-sided tests. All
statistical analyses were performed with SAS (version 9.1;
SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA), R project
(http://www.
r-project.org) and PLINK (96).

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Supplementary Material is available at HMG online.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

In this study, all plasma assays for CGEMS and SHARe were
conducted at the Jean Mayer U.S. Department of Agriculture
Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts Univer-
sity. This manuscript does not necessarily reﬂect the opinions
or views of Boston University or the NHLBI.

Conﬂict of Interest statement. None declared.

FUNDING

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health
[research grant numbers. U54 CA100971, P01 CA87969, P01
CA55075, U01 CA098233, R01 CA 065725, R01 CA070817
and R03 CA133937].

The Framingham Heart Study is conducted and supported
by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) in
collaboration with Boston University.

REFERENCES

1. Kim, Y.I. (2004) Folate and DNA methylation: a mechanistic link

between folate deﬁciency and colorectal cancer? Cancer Epidemiol.
Biomarkers Prev., 13, 511 – 519.

2. Kim, Y.I. (2005) Nutritional epigenetics: impact of folate deﬁciency on
DNA methylation and colon cancer susceptibility. J. Nutr., 135, 2703 –
2709.

3. Bates, C.J., Pentieva, K.D., Prentice, A., Mansoor, M.A. and Finch, S.

(1999) Plasma pyridoxal phosphate and pyridoxic acid and their
relationship to plasma homocysteine in a representative sample of British
men and women aged 65 years and over. Br. J. Nutr., 81, 191 – 201.

4. Selhub, J. and Miller, J.W. (1992) The pathogenesis of homocysteinemia:
interruption of the coordinate regulation by S-adenosylmethionine of the
remethylation and transsulfuration of homocysteine. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
55, 131 – 138.

5. Selhub, J. (2002) Folate, vitamin B12 and vitamin B6 and one carbon

metabolism. J. Nutr. Health Aging, 6, 39 – 42.

6. Selhub, J. (1999) Homocysteine metabolism. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 19, 217 –

246.

7. Clayton, P.T. (2006) B6-responsive disorders: a model of vitamin

dependency. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis., 29, 317 – 326.

8. Bender, D.A. (1994) Novel functions of vitamin B6. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 53,

625 – 630.

9. Watanabe, F. (2007) Vitamin B12 sources and bioavailability. Exp. Biol.

Med. (Maywood), 232, 1266– 1274.

10. Clarke, R., Daly, L., Robinson, K., Naughten, E., Cahalane, S., Fowler, B.
and Graham, I. (1991) Hyperhomocysteinemia: an independent risk factor
for vascular disease. N. Engl. J. Med., 324, 1149– 1155.

11. Stampfer, M.J., Malinow, M.R., Willett, W.C., Newcomer, L.M., Upson,
B., Ullmann, D., Tishler, P.V. and Hennekens, C.H. (1992) A prospective
study of plasma homocyst(e)ine and risk of myocardial infarction in US
physicians. JAMA, 268, 877 – 881.

12. Selhub, J., Jacques, P.F., Bostom, A.G., D’Agostino, R.B., Wilson, P.W.,
Belanger, A.J., O’Leary, D.H., Wolf, P.A., Schaefer, E.J. and Rosenberg,
I.H. (1995) Association between plasma homocysteine concentrations and
extracranial carotid-artery stenosis. N. Engl. J. Med., 332, 286 – 291.

13. Perry, I.J., Refsum, H., Morris, R.W., Ebrahim, S.B., Ueland, P.M. and

Shaper, A.G. (1995) Prospective study of serum total homocysteine
concentration and risk of stroke in middle-aged British men. Lancet, 346,
1395– 1398.

14. Mayer, E.L., Jacobsen, D.W. and Robinson, K. (1996) Homocysteine and

coronary atherosclerosis. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., 27, 517 – 527.

15. Ridker, P.M., Shih, J., Cook, T.J., Clearﬁeld, M., Downs, J.R., Pradhan,

A.D., Weis, S.E. and Gotto, A.M. Jr (2002) Plasma homocysteine
concentration, statin therapy, and the risk of ﬁrst acute coronary events.
Circulation, 105, 1776– 1779.

16. Selhub, J. (2006) The many facets of hyperhomocysteinemia: studies from

the Framingham cohorts. J. Nutr., 136, 1726S– 1730S.

17. Bird, C.L., Swendseid, M.E., Witte, J.S., Shikany, J.M., Hunt, I.F., Frankl,
H.D., Lee, E.R., Longnecker, M.P. and Haile, R.W. (1995) Red cell and
plasma folate, folate consumption, and the risk of colorectal adenomatous
polyps. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev., 4, 709 – 714.

18. Giovannucci, E., Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Rimm, E.B.,

Trichopoulos, D., Rosner, B.A., Speizer, F.E. and Willett, W.C. (1993)
Folate, methionine, and alcohol intake and risk of colorectal adenoma.
J. Natl Cancer Inst., 85, 875 – 884.

19. Tseng, M., Murray, S.C., Kupper, L.L. and Sandler, R.S. (1996)

Micronutrients and the risk of colorectal adenomas. Am. J. Epidemiol.,
144, 1005– 1014.

20. Giovannucci, E., Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Hunter, D.J., Fuchs, C.,
Rosner, B.A., Speizer, F.E. and Willett, W.C. (1998) Multivitamin use,
folate, and colon cancer in women in the Nurses’ Health Study. Ann.
Intern. Med., 129, 517 – 524.

21. Andres, E., Federici, L., Affenberger, S., Vidal-Alaball, J., Loukili, N.H.,

Zimmer, J. and Kaltenbach, G. (2007) B12 deﬁciency: a look beyond
pernicious anemia. J. Fam. Pract., 56, 537 – 542.

22. Hall, C.A. and Finkler, A.E. (1966) Measurement of the amounts of the
individual vitamin B12 binding proteins in plasma. II. Abnormalities in
leukemia and pernicious anemia. Blood, 27, 618 – 622.

23. Klerk, M., Verhoef, P., Clarke, R., Blom, H.J., Kok, F.J. and Schouten,
E.G. (2002) MTHFR 677C – .T polymorphism and risk of coronary heart
disease: a meta-analysis. JAMA, 288, 2023– 2031.

24. van Oijen, M.G., Vlemmix, F., Laheij, R.J., Paloheimo, L., Jansen, J.B.

and Verheugt, F.W. (2007) Hyperhomocysteinaemia and vitamin B12
deﬁciency: the long-term effects in cardiovascular disease. Cardiology,
107, 57 – 62.

25. Dhonukshe-Rutten, R.A., de Vries, J.H., de Bree, A., van der Put, N., van

Staveren, W.A. and de Groot, L.C. (2009) Dietary intake and status of
folate and vitamin B12 and their association with homocysteine and
cardiovascular disease in European populations. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 63,
18– 30.

26. Dahlin, A.M., Van Guelpen, B., Hultdin, J., Johansson, I., Hallmans, G.
and Palmqvist, R. (2008) Plasma vitamin B12 concentrations and the risk
of colorectal cancer: a nested case-referent study. Int. J. Cancer, 122,
2057– 2061.

27. Zhang, S.M., Willett, W.C., Selhub, J., Hunter, D.J., Giovannucci, E.L.,
Holmes, M.D., Colditz, G.A. and Hankinson, S.E. (2003) Plasma folate,
vitamin B6, vitamin B12, homocysteine, and risk of breast cancer. J. Natl
Cancer Inst., 95, 373 – 380.

28. Hultdin, J., Van Guelpen, B., Bergh, A., Hallmans, G. and Stattin, P.

(2005) Plasma folate, vitamin B12, and homocysteine and prostate cancer
risk: a prospective study. Int. J. Cancer, 113, 819 – 824.

29. Xu, X. and Chen, J. (2009) One-carbon metabolism and breast cancer: an

epidemiological perspective. J. Genet. Genomics, 36, 203 – 214.

30. Galvan-Portillo, M.V., Cantoral, A., Onate-Ocana, L.F., Chen, J.,

Herrera-Goepfert, R., Torres-Sanchez, L., Hernandez-Ramirez, R.U.,

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

4685

Palma-Coca, O. and Lopez-Carrillo, L. (2009) Gastric cancer in relation to
the intake of nutrients involved in one-carbon metabolism among MTHFR
677 TT carriers. Eur. J. Nutr., 48, 269 – 276.

31. Johansson, M., Van Guelpen, B., Vollset, S.E., Hultdin, J., Bergh, A.,

Key, T., Midttun, O., Hallmans, G., Ueland, P.M. and Stattin, P. (2009)
One-carbon metabolism and prostate cancer risk: prospective
investigation of seven circulating B vitamins and metabolites. Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev., 18, 1538 – 1543.

32. Maruti, S.S., Ulrich, C.M. and White, E. (2009) Folate and one-carbon

metabolism nutrients from supplements and diet in relation to breast
cancer risk. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 89, 624 – 633.

33. Clarke, R., Smith, A.D., Jobst, K.A., Refsum, H., Sutton, L. and Ueland,
P.M. (1998) Folate, vitamin B12, and serum total homocysteine levels in
conﬁrmed Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol., 55, 1449 – 1455.

34. Kang, J.H., Irizarry, M.C. and Grodstein, F. (2006) Prospective study of

plasma folate, vitamin B12, and cognitive function and decline.
Epidemiology, 17, 650 – 657.

35. Selhub, J., Morris, M.S., Jacques, P.F. and Rosenberg, I.H. (2009)

Folate-vitamin B-12 interaction in relation to cognitive impairment,
anemia, and biochemical indicators of vitamin B-12 deﬁciency.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 89, 702S – 706S.

36. Lee, J.E., Li, H., Giovannucci, E., Lee, I.M., Selhub, J., Stampfer, M. and

Ma, J. (2009) Prospective study of plasma vitamin B6 and risk of
colorectal cancer in men. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev., 18, 1197 –
1202.

37. Wei, E.K., Giovannucci, E., Selhub, J., Fuchs, C.S., Hankinson, S.E. and

Ma, J. (2005) Plasma vitamin B6 and the risk of colorectal cancer and
adenoma in women. J. Natl Cancer Inst., 97, 684 – 692.

38. Vermeulen, S.H., van der Vleuten, G.M., de Graaf, J., Hermus, A.R.,

Blom, H.J., Stalenhoef, A.F. and den Heijer, M. (2006) A genome-wide
linkage scan for homocysteine levels suggests three regions of interest.
J. Thromb. Haemost., 4, 1303 – 1307.

39. Cesari, M., Burlina, A.B., Narkiewicz, K., Sartori, M.T., Sacchetto, A. and
Rossi, G.P. (2000) Are fasting plasma homocyst(e)ine levels heritable? A
study of normotensive twins. J. Investig. Med., 48, 351 – 358.

40. den Heijer, M., Graafsma, S., Lee, S.Y., van Landeghem, B., Kluijtmans,
L., Verhoef, P., Beaty, T.H. and Blom, H. (2005) Homocysteine levels—
before and after methionine loading—in 51 Dutch families. Eur. J. Hum.
Genet., 13, 753 – 762.

41. Jee, S.H., Song, K.S., Shim, W.H., Kim, H.K., Suh, I., Park, J.Y., Won,

S.Y. and Beaty, T.H. (2002) Major gene evidence after
MTHFR-segregation analysis of serum homocysteine in families of
patients undergoing coronary arteriography. Hum. Genet., 111, 128 – 135.

42. Kullo, I.J., Ding, K., Boerwinkle, E., Turner, S.T., Mosley, T.H. Jr,

Kardia, S.L. and de Andrade, M. (2006) Novel genomic loci inﬂuencing
plasma homocysteine levels. Stroke, 37, 1703– 1709.

43. Siva, A., De Lange, M., Clayton, D., Monteith, S., Spector, T. and Brown,
M.J. (2007) The heritability of plasma homocysteine, and the inﬂuence of
genetic variation in the homocysteine methylation pathway. QJM, 100,
495 – 499.

44. Hubner, R.A. and Houlston, R.S. (2007) MTHFR C677T and colorectal
cancer risk: A meta-analysis of 25 populations. Int. J. Cancer, 120, 1027 –
1035.

45. Larsson, S.C., Giovannucci, E. and Wolk, A. (2007) Folate and risk of

breast cancer: a meta-analysis. J. Natl Cancer Inst., 99, 64 – 76.

46. Shan, X., Wang, L., Hoffmaster, R. and Kruger, W.D. (1999) Functional

characterization of human methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem., 274, 32613 – 32618.

47. Goyette, P. and Rozen, R. (2000) The thermolabile variant 677C – .T can

further reduce activity when expressed in cis with severe mutations for
human methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase. Hum. Mutat., 16, 132 – 138.
48. Hazra, A., Kraft, P., Selhub, J., Giovannucci, E.L., Thomas, G., Hoover,
R.N., Chanock, S.J. and Hunter, D.J. (2008) Common variants of FUT2
are associated with plasma vitamin B12 levels. Nat. Genet., 40, 1160–
1162.

49. Tanaka, T., Scheet, P., Giusti, B., Bandinelli, S., Piras, M.G., Usala, G.,
Lai, S., Mulas, A., Corsi, A.M., Vestrini, A. et al. (2009) Genome-wide
Association Study of Vitamin B6, Vitamin B12, Folate, and
Homocysteine Blood Concentrations. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 84, 477 – 482.
50. Pe’er, I., Yelensky, R., Altshuler, D. and Daly, M.J. (2008) Estimation of
the multiple testing burden for genomewide association studies of nearly
all common variants. Genet. Epidemiol., 32, 381 – 385.

4686

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

51. Weir, B.S. (1996) Genetic Data Analysis II: Methods for Discrete

Population Genetic Data. Sinauer Associates, Inc, Sunderland, MA.

52. Pare´, G., Chasman, D.I., Parker, A.N., Zee, R.R.Y., Ma¨larstig, A.,

69. Dixon, A.L., Liang, L., Moffatt, M.F., Chen, W., Heath, S., Wong, K.C.,
Taylor, J., Burnett, E., Gut, I., Farrall, M. et al. (2007) A genome-wide
association study of global gene expression. Nat. Genet., 39, 1202 – 1207.

Seedorf, U., Collins, R., Watkins, H., Hamsten, A., Miletich, J.P. et al.
(2009) Novel Associations of CPS1, MUT, NOX4 and DPEP1 With
Plasma Homocysteine in a Healthy Population: A Genome-Wide
Evaluation of 13 974 Participants in the Women’s Genome Health Study.
Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet., 2, 142 – 150.

70. Aminoff, M., Carter, J.E., Chadwick, R.B., Johnson, C., Grasbeck, R.,
Abdelaal, M.A., Broch, H., Jenner, L.B., Verroust, P.J., Moestrup, S.K.
et al. (1999) Mutations in CUBN, encoding the intrinsic factor-vitamin
B12 receptor, cubilin, cause hereditary megaloblastic anaemia 1. Nat.
Genet., 21, 309 – 313.

53. Yang, Q.H., Botto, L.D., Gallagher, M., Friedman, J.M., Sanders, C.L.,

71. Goll, M.G., Kirpekar, F., Maggert, K.A., Yoder, J.A., Hsieh, C.L., Zhang,

Koontz, D., Nikolova, S., Erickson, J.D. and Steinberg, K. (2008)
Prevalence and effects of gene-gene and gene-nutrient interactions on
serum folate and serum total homocysteine concentrations in the United
States: ﬁndings from the third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey DNA Bank. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 88, 232 – 246.

54. Kim, Y.I. (2003) Role of folate in colon cancer development and

progression. J. Nutr., 133, 3731S– 3739S.

55. Frosst, P., Blom, H.J., Milos, R., Goyette, P., Sheppard, C.A., Matthews,
R.G., Boers, G.J., den Heijer, M., Kluijtmans, L.A., van den Heuvel, L.P.
et al. (1995) A candidate genetic risk factor for vascular disease: a
common mutation in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase. Nat. Genet.,
10, 111 – 113.

56. Jacques, P.F., Bostom, A.G., Williams, R.R., Ellison, R.C., Eckfeldt, J.H.,
Rosenberg, I.H., Selhub, J. and Rozen, R. (1996) Relation between folate
status, a common mutation in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, and
plasma homocysteine concentrations. Circulation, 93, 7 – 9.

X., Golic, K.G., Jacobsen, S.E. and Bestor, T.H. (2006) Methylation of
tRNAAsp by the DNA methyltransferase homolog Dnmt2. Science, 311,
395 – 398.

72. Franke, B., Vermeulen, S.H., Steegers-Theunissen, R.P., Coenen, M.J.,

Schijvenaars, M.M., Scheffer, H., den Heijer, M. and Blom, H.J. (2009)
An association study of 45 folate-related genes in spina biﬁda:
involvement of cubilin (CUBN) and tRNA aspartic acid methyltransferase
1 (TRDMT1). Birth Defects Res. A Clin. Mol. Teratol., 85, 216 – 226.

73. Johnston, J., Yang-Feng, T. and Berliner, N. (1992) Genomic structure

and mapping of the chromosomal gene for transcobalamin I (TCN1):
comparison to human intrinsic factor. Genomics, 12, 459 – 464.

74. Kelly, R.J., Rouquier, S., Giorgi, D., Lennon, G.G. and Lowe, J.B. (1995)

Sequence and expression of a candidate for the human Secretor blood
group alpha(1,2)fucosyltransferase gene (FUT2). Homozygosity for an
enzyme-inactivating nonsense mutation commonly correlates with the
non-secretor phenotype. J. Biol. Chem., 270, 4640 – 4649.

57. Sun, D., Huang, W., Hwang, Y.Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Q. and Li, M.D.

75. van Oijen, M.G., Laheij, R.J., de Jong, C.A., Peters, W.H. and Jansen, J.B.

(2007) Regulation by nicotine of Gpr51 and Ntrk2 expression in various
rat brain regions. Neuropsychopharmacology, 32, 110 – 116.

58. Refsum, H., Nurk, E., Smith, A.D., Ueland, P.M., Gjesdal, C.G., Bjelland,

(2004) Vitamin B12 status and its association with Helicobacter pylori
infection in alcohol dependent patients. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. (Tokyo),
50, 305 – 308.

I., Tverdal, A., Tell, G.S., Nygard, O. and Vollset, S.E. (2006) The
Hordaland Homocysteine Study: a community-based study of
homocysteine, its determinants, and associations with disease. J. Nutr.,
136, 1731S– 1740S.

59. Stein, J.H., Bushara, M., Bushara, K., McBride, P.E., Jorenby, D.E. and
Fiore, M.C. (2002) Smoking cessation, but not smoking reduction, reduces
plasma homocysteine levels. Clin. Cardiol., 25, 23– 26.

60. Jacques, P.F., Bostom, A.G., Wilson, P.W., Rich, S., Rosenberg, I.H. and

Selhub, J. (2001) Determinants of plasma total homocysteine
concentration in the Framingham Offspring cohort. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 73,
613 – 621.

61. Targher, G., Bertolini, L., Zenari, L., Cacciatori, V., Muggeo, M., Faccini,

G. and Zoppini, G. (2000) Cigarette smoking and plasma total
homocysteine levels in young adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care,
23, 524 – 528.

62. Nygard, O., Vollset, S.E., Refsum, H., Stensvold, I., Tverdal, A.,
Nordrehaug, J.E., Ueland, M. and Kvale, G. (1995) Total plasma
homocysteine and cardiovascular risk proﬁle. The Hordaland
Homocysteine Study. JAMA, 274, 1526– 1533.

63. Ogasawara, M., Matsubara, Y., Mikami, H. and Narisawa, K. (1994)

Identiﬁcation of two novel mutations in the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase
gene with decreased levels of mutant mRNA in methylmalonic acidemia.
Hum. Mol. Genet., 3, 867 – 872.

64. Thoma, N.H. and Leadlay, P.F. (1996) Homology modeling of human

methylmalonyl-CoA mutase: a structural basis for point mutations causing
methylmalonic aciduria. Protein Sci., 5, 1922– 1927.

76. Dholakia, K.R., Dharmarajan, T.S., Yadav, D., Oiseth, S., Norkus, E.P.

and Pitchumoni, C.S. (2005) Vitamin B12 deﬁciency and gastric
histopathology in older patients. World J. Gastroenterol., 11, 7078 – 7083.

77. Annibale, B., Capurso, G. and Delle Fave, G. (2002) Consequences of
Helicobacter pylori infection on the absorption of micronutrients. Dig.
Liver Dis., 34 (Suppl. 2), S72– S77.

78. Tamura, A., Fujioka, T. and Nasu, M. (2002) Relation of Helicobacter

pylori infection to plasma vitamin B12, folic acid, and homocysteine
levels in patients who underwent diagnostic coronary arteriography.
Am. J. Gastroenterol., 97, 861 – 866.

79. Kaptan, K., Beyan, C., Ural, A.U., Cetin, T., Avcu, F., Gulsen, M., Finci,

R. and Yalcin, A. (2000) Helicobacter pylori—is it a novel causative
agent in Vitamin B12 deﬁciency? Arch. Intern. Med., 160, 1349– 1353.

81. Whyte, M.P., Mahuren, J.D., Vrabel, L.A. and Coburn, S.P. (1985)

80. Whyte, M.P., Mahuren, J.D., Fedde, K.N., Cole, F.S., McCabe, E.R. and
Coburn, S.P. (1988) Perinatal hypophosphatasia: tissue levels of vitamin
B6 are unremarkable despite markedly increased circulating
concentrations of pyridoxal-50-phosphate. Evidence for an ectoenzyme
role for tissue-nonspeciﬁc alkaline phosphatase. J. Clin. Invest., 81,
1234– 1239.
Markedly increased circulating pyridoxal-50-phosphate levels in
hypophosphatasia. Alkaline phosphatase acts in vitamin B6 metabolism.
J. Clin. Invest., 76, 752 – 756.
Hydrolysis of pyridoxal-50-phosphate in plasma in conditions with raised
alkaline phosphate. Gut, 21, 192 – 194.

82. Anderson, B.B., O’Brien, H., Grifﬁn, G.E. and Mollin, D.L. (1980)

65. Mikami, H., Ogasawara, M., Matsubara, Y., Kikuchi, M., Miyabayashi,

83. McDowell, M.A., Lacher, D.A., Pfeiffer, C.M., Mulinare, J., Picciano,

S., Kure, S. and Narisawa, K. (1999) Molecular analysis of
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deﬁciency: identiﬁcation of three missense
mutations in mut0 patients. J. Hum. Genet., 44, 35 – 39.

M.F., Rader, J.I., Yetley, E.A., Kennedy-Stephenson, J. and Johnson, C.L.
(2008) Blood folate levels: the latest NHANES results. NCHS Data Brief,
6, 1 – 8.

66. Acquaviva, C., Benoist, J.F., Pereira, S., Callebaut, I., Koskas, T.,

Porquet, D. and Elion, J. (2005) Molecular basis of methylmalonyl-CoA
mutase apoenzyme defect in 40 European patients affected by mut(o) and
mut- forms of methylmalonic acidemia: identiﬁcation of 29 novel
mutations in the MUT gene. Hum. Mutat., 25, 167 – 176.

67. Drennan, C.L., Matthews, R.G., Rosenblatt, D.S., Ledley, F.D., Fenton,
W.A. and Ludwig, M.L. (1996) Molecular basis for dysfunction of some
mutant forms of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase: deductions from the
structure of methionine synthase. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 5550 –
5555.

84. Selhub, J., Jacques, P.F., Bostom, A.G., Wilson, P.W. and Rosenberg, I.H.
(2000) Relationship between plasma homocysteine and vitamin status in
the Framingham study population. Impact of folic acid fortiﬁcation.
Public Health Rev., 28, 117 – 145.

85. Hunter, D.J., Kraft, P., Jacobs, K.B., Cox, D.G., Yeager, M., Hankinson,
S.E., Wacholder, S., Wang, Z., Welch, R., Hutchinson, A. et al. (2007) A
genome-wide association study identiﬁes alleles in FGFR2 associated
with risk of sporadic postmenopausal breast cancer. Nat. Genet., 39, 870 –
874.

86. Kannel, W.B. (2000) The Framingham Study: ITS 50-year legacy and

68. Ledley, F.D., Crane, A.M. and Lumetta, M. (1990) Heterogeneous alleles

future promise. J Atheroscler. Thromb., 6, 60 – 66.

and expression of methylmalonyl CoA mutase in mut methylmalonic
acidemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 46, 539 – 547.

87. Herbert, A., Lenburg, M.E., Ulrich, D., Gerry, N.P., Schlauch, K. and

Christman, M.F. (2007) Open-access database of candidate associations

Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, Vol. 18, No. 23

4687

from a genome-wide SNP scan of the Framingham Heart Study. Nat.
Genet., 39, 135 – 136.

88. Dehghan, A., Kottgen, A., Yang, Q., Hwang, S.J., Kao, W.L.,

Rivadeneira, F., Boerwinkle, E., Levy, D., Hofman, A., Astor, B.C. et al.
(2008) Association of three genetic loci with uric acid concentration and
risk of gout: a genome-wide association study. Lancet, 372, 1953 – 1961.

89. Wilk, J.B., Chen, T.H., Gottlieb, D.J., Walter, R.E., Nagle, M.W.,

Brandler, B.J., Myers, R.H., Borecki, I.B., Silverman, E.K., Weiss, S.T.
et al. (2009) A genome-wide association study of pulmonary function
measures in the Framingham Heart Study. PLoS Genet., 5, e1000429.

90. Araki, A. and Sako, Y. (1987) Determination of free and total

homocysteine in human plasma by high-performance liquid
chromatography with ﬂuorescence detection. J. Chromatogr., 422, 43 – 52.
91. Price, A.L., Patterson, N.J., Plenge, R.M., Weinblatt, M.E., Shadick, N.A.

and Reich, D. (2006) Principal components analysis corrects for
stratiﬁcation in genome-wide association studies. Nat. Genet., 38, 904 –
909.

92. Lettre, G., Lange, C. and Hirschhorn, J.N. (2007) Genetic model testing

and statistical power in population-based association studies of
quantitative traits. Genet. Epidemiol., 31, 358 – 362.

93. de Bakker, P.I., Ferreira, M.A., Jia, X., Neale, B.M., Raychaudhuri, S. and
Voight, B.F. (2008) Practical aspects of imputation-driven meta-analysis
of genome-wide association studies. Hum. Mol. Genet., 17, R122 – R128.
94. Higgins, J.P. and Thompson, S.G. (2002) Quantifying heterogeneity in a

meta-analysis. Stat. Med., 21, 1539– 1558.

95. Monsees, G.M., Tamimi, R.M. and Kraft, P. (2009) Genome-wide

association scans for secondary traits using case-control samples. Genet.
Epidemiol. Epub ahead of print.

96. Purcell, S., Neale, B., Todd-Brown, K., Thomas, L., Ferreira, M.A.,

Bender, D., Maller, J., Sklar, P., de Bakker, P.I., Daly, M.J. et al. (2007)
PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based
linkage analyses. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 81, 559 – 575.

97. Crane, A.M., Martin, L.S., Valle, D. and Ledley, F.D. (1992) Phenotype

of disease in three patients with identical mutations in methylmalonyl
CoA mutase. Hum. Genet., 89, 259 – 264.

98. Crane, A.M., Jansen, R., Andrews, E.R. and Ledley, F.D. (1992) Cloning

and expression of a mutant methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase with
altered cobalamin afﬁnity that causes mut- methylmalonic aciduria.
J. Clin. Invest., 89, 385 – 391.

/

s
c
i
t
e
n
e
g
e
r
u
t
a
n
m
o
c
.
e
r
u
t
a
n
w
w
w

.

/
/
:
p
t
t
h
 
 

p
u
o
r
G
g
n
h
s

i

 

i
l

 

b
u
P
e
r
u
t
a
N
7
0
0
2
©

 

L E T T E R S

Diet and the evolution of human amylase gene copy
number variation

George H Perry1,2, Nathaniel J Dominy3, Katrina G Claw1,4, Arthur S Lee2, Heike Fiegler5, Richard Redon5,
John Werner4, Fernando A Villanea3, Joanna L Mountain6, Rajeev Misra4, Nigel P Carter5, Charles Lee2,7,8 &
Anne C Stone1,8

Starch consumption is a prominent characteristic of
agricultural societies and hunter-gatherers in arid
environments. In contrast, rainforest and circum-arctic hunter-
gatherers and some pastoralists consume much less starch1–3.
This behavioral variation raises the possibility that different
selective pressures have acted on amylase, the enzyme
responsible for starch hydrolysis4. We found that copy number
of the salivary amylase gene (AMY1) is correlated positively
with salivary amylase protein level and that individuals from
populations with high-starch diets have, on average, more
AMY1 copies than those with traditionally low-starch diets.
Comparisons with other loci in a subset of these populations
suggest that the extent of AMY1 copy number differentiation is
highly unusual. This example of positive selection on a copy
number–variable gene is, to our knowledge, one of the ﬁrst
discovered in the human genome. Higher AMY1 copy numbers
and protein levels probably improve the digestion of starchy
foods and may buffer against the ﬁtness-reducing effects
of intestinal disease.

Hominin evolution is characterized by signiﬁcant dietary shifts,
facilitated in part by the development of stone tool technology,
the control of ﬁre and, most recently, the domestication of plants
and animals5–7. Starch, for instance, has become an increasingly
prominent component of
the human diet, particularly among
agricultural societies8. It stands to reason, therefore, that studies of
the evolution of amylase in humans and our close primate relatives
may provide insight into our ecological history. Because the human
salivary amylase gene (AMY1) shows extensive variation in copy
number9,10, we ﬁrst assessed whether a functional relationship exists
between AMY1 copy number and the amount of amylase protein
in saliva. We then determined if AMY1 copy number differs
among modern human populations with contrasting amounts of
dietary starch.

We estimated diploid AMY1 gene copy number for 50 European
Americans using an AMY1-speciﬁc real-time quantitative PCR
(qPCR) assay. We observed extensive variation in AMY1 copy number
in this population sample (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1
online), consistent with previous studies10,11. Next, we performed
protein blot experiments with saliva samples from the same indivi-
duals in order to estimate salivary amylase protein levels (Fig. 1b).
These experiments showed a signiﬁcant positive correlation between
salivary amylase gene copy number and protein expression (P o
0.001; Fig. 1c).

a

r
e
b
m
u
n

 
y
p
o
c
 
d
o
p
d

i

l

i

 

1
Y
M
A

b

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

c

a
v

i
l

a
s
 
l

m

 
/
 

n
e

i

t

 

o
r
p
1
Y
M
A
g
m

 

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

4

2
AMY1 diploid gene copy number

10 12 14 16

6

8

Figure 1 AMY1 copy number variation and salivary amylase protein
expression. (a,b) For the same European American individuals,
we estimated diploid AMY1 gene copy number with qPCR (a) and
estimated amylase protein levels in saliva by protein blot (b). Error bars
indicate s.d. (c) Relationship between AMY1 diploid copy number and
salivary amylase protein level (n ¼ 50 European Americans). A considerable
amount of variation in AMY1 protein expression is not explained by copy
number (R2 ¼ 0.351), which may reﬂect other genetic inﬂuences on
AMY1 expression, such as regulatory region SNPs or nongenetic factors
that may include individual hydration status, stress level and short-term
dietary habits.

1School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA. 2Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 3Department of Anthropology, University of California, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA. 4School of Life Sciences, Arizona
State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA. 5The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, The Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.
6Department of Anthropological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA. 7Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
8These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to N.J.D. (njdominy@ucsc.edu).

Received 9 May; accepted 3 August; published online 9 September 2007; doi:10.1038/ng2123

1 2 5 6

VOLUME 39 [ NUMBER 10 [ OCTOBER 2007 NATURE GENETICS

/

s
c
i
t
e
n
e
g
e
r
u
t
a
n
m
o
c
.
e
r
u
t
a
n
w
w
w

.

i
l

 

b
u
P
e
r
u
t
a
N
7
0
0
2
©

 

/
/
:
p
t
t
h
 
 

p
u
o
r
G
g
n
h
s

 

i

L E T T E R S

Figure 2 Diet and AMY1 copy number variation. (a) Comparison of qPCR-
estimated AMY1 diploid copy number frequency distributions for populations
with traditional diets that incorporate many starch-rich foods (high-starch)
and populations with traditional diets that include little or no starch (low-
starch). (b) Cumulative distribution plot of diploid AMY1 copy number for
each of the seven populations in the study.

Supplementary Fig. 1 online). Notably, the proportion of individuals
from the combined high-starch sample with at least six AMY1 copies
(70%) was nearly two times greater than that for low-starch popula-
tions (37%). To visualize the allele-speciﬁc number and orientation of
AMY1 gene copies, we performed high-resolution FISH on stretched
DNA ﬁbers (ﬁber FISH); these results were consistent with diploid
AMY1 copy number estimates from our qPCR experiments (Fig. 3).
The among-population patterns of AMY1 copy number variation
do not ﬁt expectations under a simple geographical region–based
model of genetic drift: our high- and low-starch samples include both
African and Asian populations, suggesting that diet more strongly
predicts AMY1 copy number than geographic proximity. Based on this
observation, we hypothesized that natural selection may have inﬂu-
enced AMY1 copy number in certain human populations. However,
we cannot rigorously test such a hypothesis on the basis of our qPCR
results alone, in part because we lack comparative data from other
loci. Therefore, we next performed array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) on the Yakut population sample with a whole-
genome tile path (WGTP) array platform that was previously used11
to describe genome-wide patterns of copy number variation in 270
individuals (the HapMap collection), including the same Japanese
population sample as in our study. For the Yakut aCGH experiments,
we used the same reference DNA sample (NA10851) as in the previous
study11,
Japanese and Yakut relative
intensity log2 ratios for the 26,574 BAC clones on the array, including
two clones mapped to the AMY1 locus.

facilitating comparisons of

a

b

c

a

l

s
a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

i
 
f

o

 

n
o

i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

2

3

4

High starch
Low starch

N
133
93

Median

7
5

Mean
6.72
5.44

s.d.
2.35
2.04

6

5
12
AMY1 diploid gene copy number

11

10

8

7

9

13

14 15

b

1.0

l

s
a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

i
 
f

o

 

n
o

i
t
r
o
p
o
r
p

 

e
v
i
t

l

a
u
m
u
C

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

2

3

High starch

Japanese
Hadza
European
American

Low starch

Biaka
Mbuti
Datog
Yakut

9

10

5

4
AMY1 diploid gene copy number

7

6

8

Although there is a considerable range of variation in dietary starch
intake among human populations, a distinction can be made between
‘high-starch’ populations for which starchy food resources comprise a
substantial portion of the diet and the small fraction of ‘low-starch’
populations with traditional diets that incorporate relatively few
starchy foods. Such diets instead emphasize proteinaceous resources
(for example, meats and blood) and simple saccharides (for example,
from fruit, honey and milk). To determine if AMY1 copy number
differs among populations with high- and low-starch diets, we
estimated AMY1 copy number in three high-starch and four low-
starch population samples. Our high-starch sample included two
agricultural populations, European Americans (n ¼ 50) and Japanese
(n ¼ 45), and Hadza hunter-gatherers who rely extensively on starch-
rich roots and tubers (n ¼ 38)12. Low-starch populations included
Biaka (n ¼ 36) and Mbuti (n ¼ 15) rainforest hunter-gatherers, Datog
pastoralists (n ¼ 17) and the Yakut, a pastoralist, ﬁshing society (n ¼
25). Additional details on the diets of these populations are provided
in Supplementary Table 2 online. We found that mean diploid AMY1
copy number was greater in high-starch populations (Fig. 2 and

Figure 3 High-resolution ﬁber FISH validation of AMY1 copy number
estimates. Red (B10 kb) and green (B8 kb) probes encompass the entire
AMY1 gene and a retrotransposon directly upstream of (and unique to)
AMY1, respectively. (a) Japanese individual GM18972 was estimated by
qPCR to have 14 (13.73 ± 0.93) diploid AMY1 gene copies, consistent with
ﬁber FISH results showing one allele with ten copies and the other with four
copies. (b) Biaka individual GM10472 was estimated by qPCR to have six
(6.11 ± 0.17) diploid AMY1 gene copies, consistent with ﬁber FISH results.
(c) The reference chimpanzee (Clint; S006006) was conﬁrmed to have two
diploid AMY1 gene copies.

NATURE GENETICS VOLUME 39 [ NUMBER 10 [ OCTOBER 2007

1 2 5 7

/

s
c
i
t
e
n
e
g
e
r
u
t
a
n
m
o
c
.
e
r
u
t
a
n
w
w
w

.

i
l

 

b
u
P
e
r
u
t
a
N
7
0
0
2
©

 

/
/
:
p
t
t
h
 
 

p
u
o
r
G
g
n
h
s

 

i

L E T T E R S

Results from the two AMY1-mapped clones on the WGTP array
supported our original observations: the log2 ratios were strongly
correlated with the qPCR estimates of AMY1 diploid copy number
(Supplementary Fig. 1), and the population mean log2 ratios for both
clones were greater for the Japanese sample (Fig. 4a and Supplemen-
tary Fig. 1). More importantly, with the WGTP data, we were able to
compare the extent of population differentiation at the AMY1 locus to
other loci in the genome for the two Asian population samples in our
study. We would expect the magnitude and direction of the Japanese-
Yakut mean log2 ratio difference for the AMY1-mapped clones to be
similar to those for other copy number–variable clones, if these CNVs
have experienced similar evolutionary pressures. However, the two
AMY1-mapped clones are signiﬁcant outliers in this distribution
(Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 2 online), leading us to reject this
null hypothesis. In addition, we considered a database of genotypes for
783 genome-wide microsatellites for the same Yakut individuals and a
different Japanese population sample13, because microsatellite loci are
usually multiallelic (as is the AMY1 locus). We found that the extent of
Japanese-Yakut differentiation at the AMY1 locus exceeded that for
497% of the microsatellite loci (Supplementary Fig. 3 online).
Although this result should be interpreted with caution because we
do not know whether AMY1 copy number and microsatellite muta-
tion rates and patterns are similar, this ﬁnding is consistent with our
results from the WGTP comparison.

These observations suggest that natural selection has shaped AMY1
copy number variation in either the Japanese or the Yakut or in both
populations. We cannot fully test the null hypothesis for the other
high- and low-starch populations in our study, but the patterns of
copy number variation we observed in these populations are similar to
those for the Japanese and Yakut and thus may also reﬂect non-neutral
evolution. We favor a model in which AMY1 copy number has been
subject to positive or directional selection in at least some high-starch
populations but has evolved neutrally (that is, through genetic drift) in
low-starch populations. Although it is possible that lower AMY1 gene
copy numbers have been favored by selection in low-starch popula-
tions, such an interpretation is less plausible for the simple reason that
excessive amylase production is unlikely to have a signiﬁcant negative
effect on ﬁtness. Furthermore, several lines of evidence offer mechan-
isms by which higher salivary amylase protein expression may confer a
ﬁtness advantage for individuals with a high-starch diet. First, a
signiﬁcant amount of starch digestion occurs in the mouth during
mastication14. For example, blood glucose has been shown to be
signiﬁcantly higher when high-starch foods such as corn, rice and
potatoes (but not low-starch foods such as apples) are ﬁrst chewed
and then swallowed, rather than swallowed directly15. In addition, it
has been suggested that oral digestion of starch is critically important
for energy absorption during episodes of diarrhea4. Diarrheal diseases
can have a signiﬁcant effect on ﬁtness; for example, such diseases
caused 15% of worldwide deaths among children younger than 5 years
as recently as 2001 (ref. 16). Last, salivary amylase persists in the
stomach and intestines after swallowing17, thereby augmenting the
enzymatic activity of pancreatic amylase in the small intestine. Higher
AMY1 copy number and a concomitant increase in salivary amylase
protein thus are likely to improve the efﬁciency with which high-
starch foods are digested in the mouth, stomach and intestines and
may also buffer against the potential ﬁtness-reducing effects of
intestinal disease.

To understand better

evolutionary context of human
AMY1 copy number variation, we analyzed patterns of AMY1 copy
number variation in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and bonobos
(Pan paniscus). In contrast to the extensive copy number variation

the

a

l

s
a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

i
 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

Japanese (n = 45; mean = 0.433; s.d. = 0.335)

Yakut (n = 25; mean = 0.071; s.d. = 0.451)

9

6

3

0
6

4

2

–0.3

0.0

0.3

0.6

0.9

1.2

1.5

Chr1tp-6D2 log2 ratio

0
–0.6

b

1.0

o

i
t

a
r
 

2

g
o

l
 

n
a
e
m

 
t

u
k
a
Y

0.5

0.0

–0.5

–1.0

–1.0

–0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Japanese mean log2 ratio

Figure 4 Japanese-Yakut copy number differentiation at AMY1 versus
other genome-wide loci. (a) Frequency distributions of WGTP aCGH relative
intensity log2 ratios from AMY1-mapped clone Chr1tp-6D2 for Japanese and
Yakut individuals. (b) Relationship between Japanese and Yakut mean log2
ratios for all autosomal WGTP clones that were copy number variable in both
populations. AMY1-mapped clones Chr1tp-6D2 and Chr1tp-30C7 are
depicted as ﬁlled red and blue circles, respectively.

we observed in humans, each of 15 wild-born western chimpanzees
(P. t. verus) showed evidence of only two diploid AMY1 copies (Fig. 3c
and Supplementary Fig. 4 online), consistent with previous ﬁnd-
ings18–21. Although we observed evidence of a gain in AMY1 copy
number in bonobos relative to chimpanzees (Supplementary Fig. 4),
our sequence-based analyses suggest that each of these AMY1 copies
has a disrupted coding sequence and may be nonfunctional (Supple-
mentary Fig. 5 online). Therefore, the average human has roughly
three times more AMY1 copies than chimpanzees, and bonobos may
not have salivary amylase at all. Outgroup comparisons with other
great apes suggest that AMY1 copy number was probably gained in the
human lineage, rather than lost in chimpanzees21,22. Given that AMY1
copy number is positively correlated with salivary amylase protein
expression in humans, it stands to reason that the human-speciﬁc
increase in copy number may explain, at least in part, why salivary
amylase protein levels are approximately six to eight times higher in
humans than in chimpanzees23. These patterns are consistent with the
general dietary characteristics of Pan and Homo; chimpanzees and
bonobos are predominantly frugivorous and ingest little starch relative
to most human populations24.

Among other primates, New World monkeys do not produce
salivary amylase and tend to consume little starch, but cercopithecines
(a subfamily of Old World monkeys including macaques and

1 2 5 8

VOLUME 39 [ NUMBER 10 [ OCTOBER 2007 NATURE GENETICS

/

s
c
i
t
e
n
e
g
e
r
u
t
a
n
m
o
c
.
e
r
u
t
a
n
w
w
w

.

i
l

 

b
u
P
e
r
u
t
a
N
7
0
0
2
©

 

/
/
:
p
t
t
h
 
 

p
u
o
r
G
g
n
h
s

i

 

L E T T E R S

mangabeys) have relatively high salivary amylase expression, even
compared to humans23. Although the genetic mechanisms are
unknown, this expression pattern may have evolved to facilitate
the digestion of starchy foods (such as the seeds of unripe fruits)
stowed in the cheek pouch, a trait that, among primates, is unique
to cercopithecines25.

The initial human-speciﬁc increase in AMY1 copy number may
have been coincident with a dietary shift early in hominin evolu-
tionary history. For example, it is hypothesized that starch-rich plant
underground storage organs (USOs) such as bulbs, corms and tubers
were a critical food resource for early hominins26,27. Changes in USO
consumption may even have facilitated the initial emergence and
spread of Homo erectus out of Africa5,28. Yet such arguments are
difﬁcult to test, mainly because direct evidence for the use of USOs is
difﬁcult to obtain, particularly for more remote time periods. USOs
themselves are perishable, as are many of the tools used to collect and
process them. Therefore, understanding the timing and nature of the
initial human-lineage AMY1 duplications may provide insight into
our ecological and evolutionary history. The low amount of nucleotide
sequence divergence among the three AMY1 gene copies found in the
human genome reference sequence (hg18; d ¼ 0.00011 to 0.00056)
implies a relatively recent origin that may be within the time frame of
modern human origins (that is, within the last B200,000 years; based
on human-chimpanzee AMY1 d ¼ 0.027 and using an estimate of
6 million years ago for divergence of the human and chimpanzee
lineages). However, given the possibility for gene conversion, we do
not necessarily consider this estimate to be reliable. The generation of
AMY1 sequences from multiple humans may ultimately help to shed
light on this issue.

In summary, we have shown that the pattern of variation in copy
number of the human AMY1 gene is consistent with a history of diet-
related selection pressures, demonstrating the importance of starchy
foods in human evolution. Although the amylase locus is one of
the most variable in the human genome with regard to copy
number10, it is by no means unique; a recent genome-wide survey
identiﬁed 1,447 copy number–variable regions among 270 pheno-
typically normal human individuals11, and many more such regions
are likely to be discovered with advances in copy number variation
detection technology. It is reasonable to speculate that copy number
variants other than AMY1 are or have been subject to strong pressures
of natural selection, particularly given their potential
inﬂuence
on transcriptional and translational levels (for example, see ref. 29).
The characterization of copy number variation among humans and
between humans and other primates promises considerable insight
into our evolutionary history.

METHODS
Samples. Buccal swabs and saliva were collected under informed consent from
50 European Americans ages 18–30 (Arizona State University institutional
review board (IRB) protocol number 0503002355). Saliva was collected for
3 min from under the tongue. Buccal swabs were collected from the Hadza
(n ¼ 38) and Datog (n ¼ 17) from Tanzania (Stanford University IRB protocol
number 9798-414). Genomic DNA samples from the Biaka (Central African
Republic; n ¼ 32), Mbuti (Democratic Republic of Congo; n ¼ 15) and Yakut
(Siberia; n ¼ 25) are from the HGDP-CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell
Line Panel. Lymphoblastoid cell lines from 45 Japanese, 4 additional Biaka and
the donor for the chimpanzee genome sequence (Clint) were obtained from the
Coriell Institute for Medical Research. Whole blood samples were collected
during routine veterinary examinations from chimpanzees and bonobos
housed at various zoological and research facilities. Two additional bonobo
samples were obtained from the Integrated Primate Biomaterials and Informa-
tion Resource. DNA was isolated using standard methods.

Copy number estimation. Primers for qPCR (Supplementary Table 3 online)
were designed to be speciﬁc to AMY1 (that is, to have sequence mismatches
with AMY2A and AMY2B) based on the human and chimpanzee reference
genome sequences. A previous study reported a single (haploid) copy of AMY1
for one chimpanzee18, and a recent analysis19 did not ﬁnd any evidence of
recent AMY1 duplication for Clint. We used ﬁber FISH to conﬁrm that Clint
has two diploid copies of AMY1 (Fig. 3c). Therefore, we were able to estimate
diploid copy number based on relative AMY1 quantity for human DNA
compared to a standard curve constructed from the DNA of Clint. A fragment
from the TP53 gene was also ampliﬁed to adjust for DNA dilution quantity
variation. Samples were run in triplicate and standards in duplicate. Experi-
ments were performed and analyzed as described previously20.

Protein blot analysis. Protein samples were prepared by solubilizing saliva
samples in 2% SDS and heating at 100 1C for 5 min. These samples were
analyzed on mini SDS-polyacrylamide gels and transferred to polyvinylidene
diﬂuoride (PVDF) membranes (Immobilon-Millipore). For quantiﬁcation
purposes, a human salivary amylase protein sample of known quantity (Sigma)
was run on each gel, with 5 mL of saliva for each sample. After transfer,
the membranes were incubated for 1.5 h with primary antibodies raised
against human salivary amylase (Sigma). The membranes were washed and
goat anti-rabbit alkaline phosphatase–conjugated IgG secondary antibodies
(Pierce) were added for 1 h. The membranes were exposed to ECF substrate
(Amersham Biosciences) for 5 min and then analyzed using a phosphorimager.
Quantiﬁcation of protein bands was performed using ImageQuant software
(Molecular Dynamics).

Fiber FISH. DNA ﬁbers were prepared by gently lysing cultured lymphoblast
cells with 300 ml Cell Lysis Buffer (Gentra Systems) per 5 million cells. 10 ml of
lysate was placed on a poly-L-lysine–coated slide (LabScientiﬁc) and mechani-
cally stretched with the edge of a coverslip. After 30 s, 300 ml of 100% methanol
was applied to ﬁx the ﬁbers. Slides were dried at 37 1C for 5 min and then
stored at room temperature (22–25 1C).

PCR product probes were made from (i) the entire AMY1 gene itself
(B10 kb; red in images) and (ii) the retrotransposon found directly upstream
of all AMY1 copies but not of pancreatic amylase genes or amylase pseudogenes
(B8 kb; green in images). The gene probe may not be speciﬁc to AMY1 under
all hybridization conditions (AMY1 sequence divergence with AMY2A and
AMY2B ¼ 7.5% and 7.1%, respectively), but the upstream probe is. We used
long-range PCR followed by nested PCR for each region (primers and
conditions are provided in Supplementary Table 3). PCR products were
puriﬁed with DNA Clean and Concentrator columns (Zymo).
For each nested PCR product, 750 ng was combined with 20 ml 2.5
random primer (BioPrime aCGH Labeling Module, Invitrogen) in a total
volume of 39 ml. Samples were incubated at 100 1C for 5 min and were then
placed on ice for 5 min. Next, 5 ml 10 dUTP and 1 ml Exo-Klenow Fragment
(BioPrime Module) and either 5 ml (5 nmol) Biotin-16-dUTP (Roche; gene
probe) or 5 ml (5 nmol) digoxigenin-11-dUTP (Roche; upstream probe) were
added, and samples were incubated at 37 1C for 5 h. Labeled products were
puriﬁed with Microcon Centrifugal Filter Devices (Millipore) using three
washes of 300 ml 0.1 SSC, eluted with 50 ml H2O. For each 1 mg of labeled
DNA, we added 10 mg human Cot-1 DNA (Invitrogen).

For each experiment, 500 ng of labeled DNA from each of the nested PCR
reactions was combined, lyophilized, reconstituted in 10 ml hybridization buffer
(50% formamide, 20% dextran sulfate, 2 SSC) and added to the slide (18 
18 mm cover glass; Fisher). Fibers and probes were denatured together
(95 1C for 3 min) and hybridized in a humidiﬁed chamber (37 1C for 40 h).
The slide was washed in 0.5 SSC at 75 1C for 5 min followed by three washes
in 1 PBS at room temperature (22–25 1C) for 2 min each. Next, ﬁbers were
incubated with 200 ml CAS Block (Zymed) and 10% (vol/vol) normal goat
serum (Zymed) for 20 min at room temperature (22–25 1C) under a HybriSlip
(Invitrogen). We used a three-step detection and ampliﬁcation (with reagents
in 200 ml CAS Block with 10% (vol/vol) normal goat serum). Each step was
conducted for 30 min at room temperature under a HybriSlip followed by
three washes in 1 PBS for 2 min each at room temperature (22–25 1C).
Reagents were as follows for each step: step (i): 1:500 anti-digoxigenin-
ﬂuorescein, Fab fragments (Roche) and 1:500 Strepavidin, Alexa Fluor 594

NATURE GENETICS VOLUME 39 [ NUMBER 10 [ OCTOBER 2007

1 2 5 9

/

s
c
i
t
e
n
e
g
e
r
u
t
a
n
m
o
c
.
e
r
u
t
a
n
w
w
w

.

/
/
:
p
t
t
h
 
 

p
u
o
r
G
g
n
h
s

 

i

i
l

 

b
u
P
e
r
u
t
a
N
7
0
0
2
©

 

L E T T E R S

conjugate (Invitrogen); step (ii): 1:250 rabbit anti-FITC (Zymed) and 1:500
biotinylated anti-streptavidin (Vector Laboratories); step (iii): 1:100 goat anti-
rabbit IgG-FITC (Zymed) and 1:500 streptavidin, Alexa Fluor 594 conjugate.
Images were captured on an Olympus BX51 ﬂuorescent microscope with
an Applied Imaging camera and were analyzed with Applied Imaging’s
Genus software.

aCGH analysis. For aCGH experiments, we used a large-insert clone DNA
microarray covering the human genome in tiling path resolution30. Test
genomic DNA samples (from Yakut individuals) and reference genomic
DNA samples (from NA10851) were labeled with Cy3-dCTP and Cy5-dCTP,
respectively (NEN Life Science Products) and were cohybridized to the array.
For each sample, a duplicate experiment was performed in dye-swap to reduce
false-positive error rates. Labeling, hybridization, washes and analyses were
performed as described11,30.

Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Genetics website.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to all our study participants. We thank H. Cann and C. de Toma
of the Fondation Jean Dausset (CEPH), the Cincinnati Zoo, the Lincoln Park
Zoo, the New Iberia Research Center, the Primate Foundation of Arizona, the
Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, the Coriell Institute for Medical
Research and the Integrated Primate Biomaterials and Information Resource for
samples. C. Tyler-Smith and Y. Gilad provided comments on a previous version
of the manuscript. We would also like to thank the Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute Microarray Facility for printing the arrays and T. Fitzgerald and D. Rajan
for technical support. This study was funded by grants from the L.S.B. Leakey
Foundation and Wenner-Gren Foundation (to N.J.D.), the Department of
Pathology, Brigham & Women’s Hospital (to C.L.), the National Institutes of
Health (to the University of Louisiana at Lafayette New Iberia Research Center;
numbers RR015087, RR014491 and RR016483) and the Wellcome Trust (H.F.,
R.R. and N.P.C.).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
G.H.P. and N.J.D. contributed equally to this work. G.H.P., N.J.D., C.L. and
A.C.S. designed the study; G.H.P., F.A.V., J.L.M. and A.C.S. collected the samples;
G.H.P. and A.S.L. performed qPCR experiments; J.W. performed protein blot
experiments; G.H.P. performed ﬁber FISH experiments; H.F. and R.R. performed
and analyzed aCGH experiments; K.G.C. performed nucleotide sequencing
experiments; G.H.P. performed data analyses; R.M., N.P.C., C.L. and A.C.S.
supervised the experiments and analyses and G.H.P. and N.J.D. wrote the paper.

Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturegenetics
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions

1. Tokarev, S.A. & Gurvich, I.S. The Yakuts. in Peoples of Siberia (eds. Levin, M.G. &

Potapov, L.P.) 243–304 (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1956).

4. Lebenthal, E. Role of salivary amylase in gastric and intestinal digestion of starch. Dig.

Dis. Sci. 32, 1155–1157 (1987).

5. Wrangham, R.W., Jones, J.H., Laden, G., Pilbeam, D. & Conklin-Brittain, N. The raw
and the stolen. Cooking and the ecology of human origins. Curr. Anthropol. 40,
567–594 (1999).

6. Klein, R.G. Archeology and the evolution of human behavior. Evol. Anthropol. 9, 17–36

(2000).

7. Diamond, J. Evolution, consequences and future of plant and animal domestication.

Nature 418, 700–707 (2002).

8. Zohary, D. & Hopf, M. Domestication of Plants in the Old World (Oxford Science

Publications, Oxford, 2000).

9. Groot, P.C. et al. The human alpha-amylase multigene family consists of haplotypes

with variable numbers of genes. Genomics 5, 29–42 (1989).

10. Iafrate, A.J. et al. Detection of large-scale variation in the human genome. Nat. Genet.

36, 949–951 (2004).

11. Redon, R. et al. Global variation in copy number in the human genome. Nature 444,

444–454 (2006).

12. Vincent, A.S. Plant foods in savanna environments: a preliminary report of tubers eaten

by the Hadza of northern Tanzania. World Archaeol. 17, 131–148 (1984).

13. Rosenberg, N.A. et al. Clines, clusters, and the effect of study design on the inference
of human population structure. PLoS Genet. 1, e70 (2005)(doi:10.1371/journal.
pgen.0010070).

14. Valdez, I.H. & Fox, P.C. Interactions of the salivary and gastrointestinal systems. I. The

role of saliva in digestion. Dig. Dis. 9, 125–132 (1991).

15. Read, N.W. et al. Swallowing food without chewing; a simple way to reduce post-

prandial glycaemia. Br. J. Nutr. 55, 43–47 (1986).

16. Lopez, A.D., Mathers, C.D., Ezzati, M., Jamison, D.T. & Murray, C.J. Global and
regional burden of disease and risk factors, 2001: systematic analysis of population
health data. Lancet 367, 1747–1757 (2006).

17. Fried, M., Abramson, S. & Meyer, J.H. Passage of salivary amylase through the

stomach in humans. Dig. Dis. Sci. 32, 1097–1103 (1987).

18. Samuelson, L.C., Wiebauer, K., Snow, C.M. & Meisler, M.H. Retroviral and pseudogene
insertion sites reveal the lineage of human salivary and pancreatic amylase genes from
a single gene during primate evolution. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 2513–2520 (1990).

19. Cheng, Z. et al. A genome-wide comparison of recent chimpanzee and human

segmental duplications. Nature 437, 88–93 (2005).

20. Perry, G.H. et al. Hotspots for copy number variation in chimpanzees and humans.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 8006–8011 (2006).

21. Wilson, G.M. et al. Identiﬁcation by full-coverage array CGH of human DNA copy
number increases relative to chimpanzee and gorilla. Genome Res. 16, 173–181
(2006).

22. Fortna, A. et al. Lineage-speciﬁc gene duplication and loss in human and great ape

evolution. PLoS Biol. 2, e207 (2004)(doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020207).

23. McGeachin, R.L. & Akin, J.R. Amylase levels in the tissues and body ﬂuids of several

primate species. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A 72, 267–269 (1982).

24. Hohmann, G., Robbins, M. & Boesch, C. Feeding Ecology in Apes and Other Primates

(Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2006).

25. Lambert, J.E. Competition, predation, and the evolutionary signiﬁcance of the cerco-
pithecine cheek pouch: the case of Cercopithecus and Lophocebus. Am. J. Phys.
Anthropol. 126, 183–192 (2005).

26. Coursey, D.G. Hominid evolution and hypogeous plant foods. Man 8, 634–635 (1973).
27. Laden, G. & Wrangham, R. The rise of the hominids as an adaptive shift in fallback
foods: plant underground storage organs (USOs) and australopith origins. J. Hum. Evol.
49, 482–498 (2005).

28. Hawkes, K., O’Connell, J.F., Jones, N.G., Alvarez, H. & Charnov, E.L. Grandmothering,
menopause, and the evolution of human life histories. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95,
1336–1339 (1998).

2. Draper, H.H. The aboriginal Eskimo diet in modern perspective. Am. Anthropol. 79,

29. Stranger, B.E. et al. Relative impact of nucleotide and copy number variation on gene

309–316 (1977).

expression phenotypes. Science 315, 848–853 (2007).

3. Hart, T.B. & Hart, J.A. The ecological basis of hunter-gatherer subsistence in African

30. Fiegler, H. et al. Accurate and reliable high-throughput detection of copy number

rain forests: the Mbuti of Eastern Zaire. Hum. Ecol. 14, 29–55 (1986).

variation in the human genome. Genome Res. 16, 1566–1574 (2006).

1 2 6 0

VOLUME 39 [ NUMBER 10 [ OCTOBER 2007 NATURE GENETICS

DRUG METABOLISM REVIEWS,  26( 1&2),  185-199  (1994) 

METHYL GROUP DEFICIENCY 
I N H EPATO CARCl N 0 G EN ES I S * 

LIONEL A. POIRIER+ 
National Center for Toxicological Research 
Division of  Nutritional Toxicology 
Jefferson, Arkansas 72079 

INTRODUCTION.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

185 
I. 
11.  HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENTS PRIOR TO  1980 . . . . . .  186 
111.  HEPATOCARCINOGENESIS AND  BIOCHEMICAL 

CHANGES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

187 

IV.  ALTERATIONS IN ONCOGENES  DURING HEPATOCAR- 

CINOGENESIS BY  METHYL DEPRIVATION  . . . . . . . . .  189 
192 
195 

V.  ALTERNATE MECHANISMS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

My  interest in  the  role of  dietary  and  physiological methyl  insufficiency 
in  hepatocarcinogenesis  has  its  roots  in  research  conducted  during  my 

*Presented at  the  First  Arkansas Toxicology Symposium,  honoring Eliz- 
abeth  C.  Miller,  Ph.D.,  and  James  A.  Miller,  Ph.D.,  December  10-11, 
1992, at the Arkansas Excelsior Hotel,  Little Rock,  Arkansas. 
'Address  correspondence to the author: (HFT- 140). NCTR, Jefferson, AR 

72079. 

Copyright 0 1994 by  Marcel  Dekker.  Inc 

186 

POIR I ER 

tenure as a graduate student with the Millers at the University of  Wisconsin 
[I]. In  the  rnid-l960s,  we  discovered that  the  compound N-benzoyloxy-N- 
methyl-4-aminoazobenzene  acted as a model ultimate carcinogen for the ar- 
omatic  aminoazo  dye  carcinogens.  The  reaction  with  methionine  of  this 
compound  in  virro,  and  of  the  presumptive N-hydroxy  metabolite  in  vivo, 
laid the  basis for the  identification  of  the  metabolic activation of  aromatic 
aminoazo dye  carcinogens  [ l ,   21.  Earlier,  for  reasons  wholly  unrelated  to 
the N-oxidation of  aromatic amines, the Millers, in  1953, had  suggested “a 
methyl deletion hypothesis”  as a possible mechanism for aminoazo dye car- 
cinogenesis [3]. Other professors who contributed to my  interest in this area 
of  research were: Dr.  Charles Heidelberger through his  studies on  the  syn- 
thesis and  biochemical activity of  5-fluorodeoxyuridine; through  its  inhibi- 
tion of  the enzyme thymidylate synthetase, this compound upsets the labile 
I-carbon  pool  in  cells  [4]. Finally,  the  influence of  Dr.  Carl  A.  Bauman, 
who was then a professor in the Department of  Biochemistry at the Univer- 
sity of  Wisconsin, and  who emphasized the importance of  both dietary  de- 
ficiency and  antimetabolites as means of obtaining nutritional deficiencies, 
can be  seen throughout this presentation. 

11.  HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT PRIOR TO 1980 

The major scientific developments showing possible causal links between 
methyl  group  insufficiency  and  hepatocarcinogenesis  in  vivo  are  summa- 
in  Table  1  [5-15].  The  hepatocarcinogenic  activity  of  choline- 
rized 
deficient diets was first reported in  1946 [5]. These early observations were 
extended to  other  species  and  organs but  were eventually called  into ques- 
tion because of  the discovery of  aflatoxin contamination in the peanut  meal 
diets  used  to  achieve a  low  methyl  content  in  the  diet  [16]. From  1955 to 
1983, no  major  studies  appeared  in  the  literature  describing  the  complete 
carcinogenic activity of  choline-deficient diets. Yet,  other studies continued 
to  provide  indications  that  hepatocarcinogenesis was  frequently associated 
with  or enhanced by  methyl  insufficiency (Table  I).  Also,  the  administra- 
tion  to  rats  of  the  methionine  antimetabolite  ethionine  [17], of  the  low- 
lipotrope diet  of  Newberne  [ 181,  and  of  the  amino-acid-defined,  methyl- 
deficient  diet  of  Poirier  (191,  all  provided  evidence  of  hepatic  methyl 
insufficiency either  with  low  levels of  S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) or  of 
macromolecular hypomethylat ion  [ 201.  Finally,  the  results of  LaPeyre  and 
Becker  [ 151 clearly  showed that  the administration of  the  hepatocarcinogen 
2-acetylaminofluorene,  under  conditions  leading to  liver tumor  formation, 
also led to  the hypomethylation of  hepatic  DNA. 

METHYL INSUFFICIENCY IN CARCINOGENESIS 

187 

TABLE  1 

Major Developments  Prior to  1980 Showing Links Between Methyl 

Group Insufficiency and Hepatocarcinogenesis 

Year( s) 
1946-  1954 

Group 

Salmon and 

Copeland [ 5 ,  61 

1956-1963 

E.  Farber  [7, 81 

1972-  1980 

L.  Poirier 

et  al.  [9,  101 

1974-  1980 

Newberne, Rogers 

et al.  [ I l ,   121 

1978-1980 

Lombardi, Shinozuka 

et al.  [13,  141 

1979 

LaPeyre and 

Becker [I51 

Findings 

Choline-deficient diets, con- 
taining peanut meal or soy- 
bean  meal, caused  liver 
cancer in  rats and mice. 
These diets were  later- shown 
to  be contaminated with the 
liver carcinogen aflatoxin. 

The methionine antagonist 

ethionine caused liver cancer 
in rats. 

Chronic administration of  liver 

carcinogens or of  methyl- 
deficient diets to rats led to 
similar biochemical changes 
in the  liver, including de- 
creased hepatic SAM. 
A  low-lipotrope (methyl- 

deficient) diet enhanced the 
activities of  several hepato- 
carcinogens in  rats. 

A  choline-devoid diet exerted 

both cocarcinogenic and 
tumor-promoting activities 
toward the  livers of  rats. 

Feeding a carcinogenic regime 
of  2-acetylaminofluorene to 
rats led to DNA  hypomethy- 
lation in the liver. 

111.  HEPATOCARCINOGENESIS  AND 

BIOCHEMICAL CHANGES 

Beginning  in  1983,  three  publications clearly  showed  that  carcinogen- 
free  methyl-deficient diets caused  liver cancer in  rats  [21-231.  In  the  first 
study, Mikol  et  al.  [21], using  an  amino acid-defined diet,  showed  that  a 

POI R I ER 

diet lacking methionine and choline produced  liver cancer by  itself  and en- 
hanced  liver tumor formation in  rats given a single initiating dose of  dieth- 
ylnitrosame.  Ghoshal  and  Farber  [22]  and  Yokoyama  et  al.  [23],  using 
alcohol-extracted,  peanut-meal-containing  diets,  obtained  similar  tumor 
yields in the livers of  male rats. Thus, the hepatocarcinogenicity of  choline 
or methyl deprivation  seemed to be  clearly established.  In fact, most of  the 
biochemical  changes  commonly  associated  with  liver  tumor  formation  by 
chemical carcinogens were also seen during hepatocarcinogenesis by  methyl 
deprivation.  These  included: the  accumulation of  lipid  peroxides  [24, 251, 
increased levels  of  ornithine  and  SAM decarboxylases  [ 191,  increased thy- 
midine  incorporation into liver DNA  [26], decreased levels of  histidase and 
urocanase (271, and finally, increased formation of  altered hepatic foci [28, 
291.  The  latter  findings  were  particularly  interesting  from  a  potentially 
mechanistic standpoint.  In  the absence of  diethylnitrosamine initiation,  the 
chronic feeding of  the amino-acid-defined diet, lacking both methionine and 
choline,  led  to  the  formation  of  altered  hepatic  foci  which  continuously 
increased  in  volume  but  not  in  number; this observation  is  consistent with 
the  hypothesis  that  methyl  deprivation  is  not  a  continuously  initiating 
stress, but  rather  is a highly effective promoter of  preexisting,  initiated  he- 
patocytes  [28]. The  strong  liver-tumor-promoting activity  of  choline  defi- 
ciency  had  been  previously  described  [ 301. 

While  the  effects  of  dietary  methyl  deficiency  on  hepatocarcinogenesis 
were  being  explored,  other  investigations  were  conducted  on  the  interac- 
tions between  hepatocarcinogens and  liver tumor  promoters and  labile me- 
thyl  groups.  In  particular,  the  effects  of  such  interactions  in  liver  tumor 
formation,  on  the  hepatic  levels of  SAM,  and  on  the  DNA  content  of  5- 
methyldeoxycytidine (5-MC) were determined.  The results are summarized 
in  Table 2 [8, 9,  12,  15,  18. 21,  31-39].  The hepatocarcinogenic activities 
of  three  of  the  four carcinogens  examined-ethionine, 
diethylnitrosamine, 
and  2-acetylaminofluorene-were 
shown  to  be  enhanced  by  dietary  lipo- 
trope deficiency or to be  inhibited by  high dietary  levels of  methionine and/ 
or  choline  (Table 2). In  one  study,  lipotrope deficiency  was  not  shown  to 
exert any  significant effect upon  the hepatocarcinogenic activity of  dimeth- 
ylnitrosamine [ 121. Further, the liver-tumor-promoting activity of  phenobar- 
bital  and  of  DDT was  suppressed in  rodents by  the  feeding of  high dietary 
levels of  methionine and choline (Table 2)  1311. A11  six of  the hepatocarci- 
nogenic  stressors whose  activity  was  inhibited  by  methyl donors  were  also 
shown  to decrease  the  hepatic  content of  SAM  or  the  ratio  of  SAM  to S- 
adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) in  the  livers of  chronically fed  rats (Table 2). 
SAH is both  a product of  and  a strong inhibitor of  SAM-dependent methy- 
lations  [40]. Similarly, four such  carcinogenic regimes led  to  decreased  5- 
MC  in  hepatic  DNA  under  chronic  feeding conditions  (Table  2)  (15,  35- 

METHYL INSUFFICIENCY  IN CARCINOGENESIS 

189 

TABLE 2 

Hepatocarcinogens and Liver Tumor Promoters Whose Activities 

Are Altered by  Methyl Donors or Which Decrease Hepatic SAM or 5- 

Methyldeoxycytidine in  Total Hepatic DNA of Rats 

Compound or diet 
Methyl deficiency 
Ethionine 
Diethylnitrosamine 
2-Acety laminof luorene 
Phenobarbital 
DDT 
Dimethylnitrosamine 
Methapyrilene 

Antagonism 
by  methyl 
donors" 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 

~~ 

~ 

SAM 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

h - 

5-MC 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

-b 

Ref. 

[21, 32,  351 
[8, 33,  36,  371 
I12, 21,  91 
[12,  18,  151 
[31, 34,  381 
[3 1,341 
[I21 
[39] 

"Or  enhancement by  dietary  methyl deficieincy. 
bIncreased. 

to 

381.  An  exception 
the  compound 
methapyrilene.  The chronic administration of  this hepatocarcinogen to rats 
was shown to increase ratios  of  SAM to SAH and  to  increase the extent of 
DNA  methylation in the liver  [39]. 

the  above  generalization 

is 

IV.  ALTERATIONS IN ONCOGENES DURING 

HEPATOCARCINOGENESIS BY  METHYL DEPRIVATION 

The early association between decreased hepatic SAM and DNA hypom- 
ethylation led to the proposal that increased oncogene expression caused by 
such  hypomethylat ion  was  a  causative  factor  in  hepatocarcinogenesis  by 
methyl  deficiency.  This  hypothesis  was  supported  by  a  number  of  related 
observations. Specific gene hypomethylation has been commonly associated 
with  increased expression [41]. Two  DNA  hypomethylating agents,  the  an- 
timetabolites  ethionine  and  5-azacytidine,  altered  differentiation  of  Friend 
erythroleukemia cells in vitro [42]. 5-Azacytidine transformed cells in  vitro 
[43] and  enhanced liver tumor formation  in  vivo [44, 451.  SAM-dependent 
DNA  methylation  inhibited  the  transforming  activity  of  the  Moloney 
sarcoma  virus  in  virro  [46].  Generalized  DNA  hypomethylation  was 

I90 

POIRIER 

commonly seen in the tumors and transformed cells compared to the tissues 
and  cells of  origin  [47].  Finally,  the  H-rus  oncogene  of  colon  carcinomas 
was hypomethylated compared to the adjacent normal tissue  1481. Our own 
studies showed that the  18-month feeding of  any of  several methyl-deficient 
amino-acid-defined diets led to hypomethylation of  the c-H-rus and c-K-rus 
oncogenes in  both  neoplastic  and  preneoplastic  liver 149). More  recent  re- 
sults showed that  1- to 32-week feeding of the carcinogenic methyl-deficient 
amino-acid-defined  diet  resulted  in  the  hypomethylation  of  CCGG  se- 
quences  in  the  c-H-rus,  the  c-K-rus,  and  the  clfos  protooncogenes  at  all 
times  investigated  [50].  In  fact,  the  methylation  changes  in  the  c-H-rus 
gene  increased  in  intensity  throughout the  experimental  period  until  at  32 
weeks they  resembled those seen in  the  livers of  rats fed  the same diet  for 
18  months.  Slot-blot  analyses of  the  same livers showed increased expres- 
sion  of  the  same  three  protoncogenes correlating  with  decreased  methyla- 
tion  [5 I].  These  results  demonstrate  early  selective  hypomethylation  of 
some  CCGG  sites,  accompanied  by  increased  gene  expression,  in  rats 
undergoing hepatocarcinogenesis by  dietary  methyl deprivation.  All  of  the 
oncogene  changes  described  above  were 
independent  of  carcinogen 
administrat ion. 

Several  other  laboratories  have  investigated  the  correlations  between 
DNA  methylation  and  oncogene  expression  during  hepatocarcinogenesis. 
Wainfan,  Christman,  and  their  collaborators  [52,  531  showed  that  the 
chronic  administration  to  rats  of  an  amino-acid-defined,  methyl-deficient 
diet for  1-4  weeks led  to the following: ( I )   DNA hypomethylation as mea- 
sured by  SAM-dependent, methyl acceptor activity; (2) increased DNA  me- 
thylase activity;  (3) increased expression and  decreased  methylation of  the 
protooncogenes c-myc, c-fos,  and c-Hi-rus; and (4) no change in the expres- 
sion  of  methylation of  the  c-K-ras  oncogene.  All  of  the  changes observed 
by  this group could be reversed by  placing the animals on the corresponding 
methyl-adequate  diet  for  1-2  weeks  [52,  531. The  group  of  Locker  and 
Lombardi  has  examined  the  hepatocarcinogenenic  effects  of  a  choline- 
devoid diet on the amplification and methylation of  the c-myc protoncogene 
1541. They found that:  (1) c-myc was amplified  2-  to  70-fold in  all  tumors 
produced by  the diet; (2) relative c-myc transcript  levels increased with the 
stages of neoplasia; (3) hypomethylation of  c-myc was observed in the livers 
of  rats  fed the choline-devoid diet for  12 or more months; and (4) the c-myc 
gene  in  tumors  showed  varying  degrees  both  of  hypermethylation  and  of 
specific  site hypomethylation.  In  related  studies,  Feo and  his  collaborators 
[55]  investigated  SAMEAH  ratios  as  well  as  oncogene  methylation  and 
expression in the persistent nodules produced  in the livers of  rats  treated by 
a  modified  Soh-Farber  regime  [56]. They  found  the  following changes  in 
the  persistent nodules:  (1) decreased  SAM/SAH ratios  to 40%  of  controls; 

METHYL INSUFFICIENCY  IN CARCINOGENESIS 

191 

TABLE 3 

Effects of  SAM on the Incidence of  Hepatocellular Carcinomas 
in Rats Subjected to the InitiatiodSelectiodPromotion Regime" 

Time of  sacrifice  (months) 

6 
14 
24-28 

"Derived  from Ref.  58. 

Incidence of  liver carcinomas 
Control 
o/ 10 
11/12 
10/10 

o/ 10 
1/12 
3/11 

SAM-treated 

(2) decreased  5-MC content  to  50% of  control  values;  (3) 4-  to  6-fold  in- 
creases in the c-K-rus, c-H-rus, and c-myc RNA transcripts; and (4) hypom- 
ethylation of  all three protoncogenes investigated [ 5 5 ] .  Chronic treatment of 
such animals with SAM led  to partial, but marked, reversal of all molecular 
changes  noted  1571.  In  an  extension  of  these  studies,  the  same  group 
showed  that  the  chronic  administration  of  SAM  itself  markedly  inhibited 
the  tumor-promoting activity of  phenobarbital  in  rats  previously treated  by 
the Soh-Farber  regimen  (Table 3) [58]. 

While  the  changes  described  above essentially  describe  correlations  be- 
tween  oncogene  hypomethylation  and  activation,  other  results  recently 
showed a  high  frequency of  mutations  in  the p53  gene  in  the  DNA  from 
tumors  caused  by  choline  deprivation  [59].  In  preliminary  studies,  DNA 
from tumors derived from the livers of  rats fed amino-acid-defined, methyl- 
deficient diets transformed NIH-3T3 cells [49]. However, in this study, only 
4  of  28  tumor  DNA  samples  examined  exhibited  transfecting  activity;  all 
showed  amplified  H-ras  in  the  transfectants.  However,  all  of  the  positive 
DNA  samples  came  from  diethylnitrosamine-initiated rats;  none  of  the 
DNA  samples  from  the  uninitiated  rats  fed  the  severely  methyl-deficient 
diets  transformed  NIH-3T3  cells  [49].  In  more  recent  studies,  DNA  sam- 
ples  from  liver tumors developing in  rats  fed  the  methionine- and choline- 
deficient  diet,  as  well  as  from  cells  obtained  from 
these  tumors, 
transformed NIH-3T3 cells; the cells displayed c-myc amplification  [60]. 

In  summary, the  molecular biological studies conducted to date on  hepa- 
tocarcinogenesis by  dietary  methyl deprivation  indicate that  while hypome- 
thylation  and  increased  expression  of  c-H-rus,  c-K-rus,  and  c-fos  have 
all  been observed,  their role  in carcinogenesis,  in the absence of  an initiat- 
ing  agent,  remains  to  be  established.  On  the  other  hand,  the  presence  of 
activated  myc  and  mutated  p53  genes  in  the  tumors  of  animals  fed  the 

192 

POIRIER 

methyl-deficient  diets  without  any  further  carcinogen  treatment  suggests 
that such changes are likely to play a causative role in carcinogenesis in this 
system. 

V.  ALTERNATE MECHANISMS 

While  the  prospective  mechanism  of  carcinogenesis  by  methyl  insuffi- 
ciency  emphasized  in  this  presentation  is  enhanced  oncogene  expression 
caused by  gene hypomethylation, other mechanisms may  be  responsible for 
such biological effects. Chief among the hypotheses proposed are mutations 
produced  by  varying  mechanisms such  as oxidative  damage  [61. 621,  ab- 
normal  DNA  methylation  [63, 641,  and  altered deoxynucleotide pool  sizes 
1651. Consistent with  a hypothesis that oxidative damage to DNA results in 
the mutations leading to cancer are the observations that the chronic admin- 
istration of choline-deficient diets leads to: ( I )   single-strand breaks 1611; (2) 
high  hepatic  levels of  peroxidized lipids  [61, 661;  (3) the  inhibition of  al- 
tered hepatic foci induced by  choline deprivation through feeding of  antiox- 
idants [67]; and (4) the formation of  8-hydroxyguanine in hepatic DNA  [62, 
681. On the other hand, a recent elegant study of  Shen et al.  [64] has shown 
that  the  transfection  of  the  Hpa  11  methylase  gene  into  bacteria  lacking 
uracil-DNA  glycosylase  results  in  a  high  frequency  of  C  to  U  transition 
mutations  in  the  absence of  the  substrate  SAM.  Such  mutations  were  re- 
duced  to  background  levels  by  high  levels of  SAM  or  SAH  [64]. These 
results are consistent with previous findings that a high  proportion of  inac- 
tivating mutations in the p53  gene in colorectal cancer occur at methylation 
sites on  DNA  [69] and  that the cytosine complex with  methylase is chemi- 
cally  susceptible  to deamination  unless  it  is  rapidly  methylated  with  SAM 
[70]. Finally, the control exerted by  SAM on  folate distribution  is expected 
to alter the deoxynucleotide pool sizes in target tissues [71]. This is clearly 
the case in the spleens of  rats fed diets deficient in  folate,  methionine, and 
choline (Table 4) [72]. Significant decreases in the dGTP,  dATP, and dTMP 
were  noted  in  the  spleens  of  rats  fed  a  folate-deficient  or  a  methionine/ 
choline-deficient diet. 

Extensions to other organs of  such studies indicate that physiological me- 
thyl  insufficiency  may  contribute  to  carcinogenesis  to  biological  systems 
other  than  the  livers  of  choline-deficient  rats.  For  example,  a  number  of 
observations  have  linked  the  abnormal  differentiation  of  pancreatic  acinar 
cells with  an  inadequate supply of  methyl donors. Thus,  pancreatic  degen- 
eration  is a common feature of  ethionine toxicity  in  rodents  [8]. Pancreatic 

METHYL INSUFFICIENCY IN CARCINOGENESIS 

193 

TABLE 4 

Deoxyribonucleotide Pools in  the Spleens of  Rats 

Chronically Fed  Methyl-Deficient Diets" 

Dietary group 
Control 

FD" 

MCD' 

MCFC" 

Deoxyribonucleotide level (pmol/ lo6 cells)' 

dCTP 
23.1 
k3.7 
19.2 
k3.8 
18.0 
25.5 
17.3 
24.6 

dTTP 
20.9 
k5.9 
13.6 
k6.1 
13.9 
24.2 
13.3d 
k3.8 

dGTP 
20.1 
k2.2 
7Sd 
28.5 
13.6d 
23.9 
2.Od 
23.5 

dATP 
4.2 
21.5 
2.5d 
20.3 
2.5d 
20.6 
2.3d 
20.8 

dUMP 
4.7 
20.6 
4.1 
20.9 
3.2 
21.1 
6.4d 
21.2 

dTMP 
9.6 
21.8 
5.2d 
22.1 
6.gd 
22.4 
5.7d 
21.3 

"Compiled from Ref. 72. 
'Mean 
"FD  =  folate  deficient;  MCD  =  methionine  and  choline  deficient; 

-+  SD. 

MCFD  =  methionine, choline, and  folate deficient. 

dSignificantly different from corresponding control value. 

acinar cells from hamster embryos differentiate normally only  in  the pres- 
ence of  such methyl group sources as methionine, choline, and SAM [73]. 
Further, hepatization  of  pancreatic  acinar cells occurs  in  hamsters treated 
sequentially with ethionine and a choline-devoid diet 1741. Finally, such hep- 
atization of  pancreatic acinar cells is seen in  rats chronically fed an amino- 
acid-defined methyl-deficient diet  1751.  Recent results from  the  studies by 
Lyn-Cook at NCTR  176-791  have tended to increase the number of  associ- 
ations found between methyl insufficiency, DNA hypomethylation, and sus- 
ceptibility  to  transformation  by  pancreatic  acinar  cells  (Table  5).  For 
example, pancreatic acinar cells in  vitro  acquire hepatocyte-like properties 
following treatment with  the  DNA-hypomethylating agent  azacytidine  (Ta- 
ble 5). Also,  pancreatic acinar cells derived from rats  undergoing  hepato- 
carcinogenesis by  methyl  deprivation  seem  to  transform  more  readily  in 
vitro than do the corresponding cells from control animals [79]. 
The evidence currently available indicates that in humans, folate depriva- 
tion  may  contribute  strongly  to  a  methyl  insufficiency  in  vivo.  Our  own 
interests in this area occurred with the discovery that HIV-infected patients 
had  low  levels of  both  SAM  and  NS-methyltetrahydrofolate in  their  cere- 

194 

POIRIER 

TABLE 5 

Major  Findings on Hypomethylation and the Pancreas" 

I .   The  DNA  hypomethylating agent  azacytidine  induces transdifferentia- 
2.  Azacytidine  treatment  of  pancreatic  acinar cells  in  v i m  produces bio- 

tion  of  pancreatic  acinar cells  in  v i m .  
chemical changes similar to those caused by  H-ras transfection. 

3.  The  pancreatic  carcinogen  azaserine  induces  hypomethylation and  in- 

creased expression of  c-H-ras oncogene in  the  pancreas of  rats. 

4.  Pancreatic  acinar  cells  derived  from  rats  fed  an  amino-acid-defined, 
methyl-deficient diet transform more readily than do the corresponding 
cells  from control animals. 
"Compiled  from Refs. 76-79. 

brospinal  fluid  (80, 811.  Normally,  low  SAM  arising  from dietary  methyl 
insufficiency  is  accompanied  by  an  increased  proportion  of  tissue  NS- 
methyltetrahydrofolate [71]. Thus, the prospect  arose that  the  low  SAM  in 
these  patients  was  a consequence and  not  a cause  of  the  one-carbon  defi- 
ciency  noted  in  these patients  1821. Other  studies have  increased the  num- 
ber  of  associations  between  folate  deficiency,  physiological  methyl  group 
insufficiency in  vivo,  and  cancer  formation  in  humans  (Table 6) [83-941. 
At  present,  however, we  are unaware  of  any  clear evidence  indicating  that 
in  humans folate deficiency results in  methyl  insufficiency in  any organ. 

In  rats,  however,  the  situation  is  different.  Within  the  last  few  years, 
Walzem and Clifford (951 developed an  amino-acid-defined, folate-deficient 
diet permitting the long-term survival of  rats. The chronic administration of 
these diets to rats has resulted in: ( I )  significant general hypomethylation of 

TABLE 6 

Folate Deficiency, Choline Deficiency, and Cancer in Humans 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~~ 

~ 

Folate  deficiency  is  relatively  common  and  choline  deficiency  is  fairly 

uncommon  in the human  population  183, 841. 

Alcohol  induces  both  hepatotoxicity and  folate  deficiency  in  humans  and 
experimental  animals;  its  hepatotoxic  effects  can  be  inhibited  by  SAM 
[ 85-90]. 

Clinical  studies  have  shown  an  association  between  folate  deficiency  and 
dysplasia  in  the  cervical,  bronchial,  and  colonic epithelium,  as  well  as 
with  colon tumor formation  (91-941. 

METHYL INSUFFICIENCY IN CARCINOGENESIS 

195 

liver DNA  [96]; (2) 57-88%  decreases in  the pancreatic ratios of  SAM to 
SAH, chiefly by  large  increases in  SAH  1971; and (3) enhanced formation 
of  dysplasia and  of  neoplastic  lesions  in  the  colon  of  dimethylhydrazine- 
treated rats (981. Thus, it appears reasonable to propose that the physiolog- 
ical  insufficiency of  methyl donors that occurs in  rats as a consequence of 
either choline or methionine deficiency may  also be  seen in  humans, espe- 
cially under conditions of  toxic stress. 

REFERENCES 

27,  1600 (1967). 

berg,  Proc. SOC. Exptl.  Biol. Med., 97, 470 (1958). 

[I] L. A.  Poirier, J.  A.  Miller,  E. C.  Miller,  and  K.  Sato,  Cancer Res., 
[2] J.  A.  Miller and E. C. Miller, Prog. Exp. Tumor Rex, If, 273 (1969). 
[3] J.  A.  Miller and E. C.  Miller, Adv.  Cancer Rex, I ,  339 (1953). 
[4]  C. Heidelberger, L. Griesbach, 0. Cruz, R. J. Schnitzer, and E. Grun- 
[5]  D. H.  Copeland and  W. D.  Salmon, Am.  J. Pathol., 22,  1059 (1946). 
[6] W.  D.  Salmon  and  D.  H.  Copeland, Ann.  NY  Acad.  Sci., 57,  664 
(71  E. Farber, Arch.  Pathol., 62, 445 (1956). 
[8] E.  Farber, Adv. Cancer Rex, 7, 383 (1963). 
[9]  Y.  S. S .  Buehring, L. A. Poirier, and E. L. R. Stokstad, Cancer Res., 
36, 2775 (1976). 
[lo] L. A.  Poirier, N.  Shivapurkar, C. L.  Hyde, and  Y.  B.  Mikol, in  The 
Biochemistry  of  S-Adenosylme thionine  and  Related  Compounds  (E. 
Usdin, R. T. Borchardt, and C. R. Creveling, eds.), MacMillian Press, 
London,  1982, pp.  283-286. 
[ l l ]  A.  E.  Rogers, 0. Sanchez, F.  M. Feinsod, and F? M. Newberne, Can- 
cer Res., 34, 96 (1974). 
[12] A.  E.  Rogers and F? M.  Newberne, Nutr. Cancer, 2,  104 (1980). 
[13] H.  Shinozuka, S. L.  Katyal, and B.  Lombardi, Int. J. Cancer, 22, 36 
[14] S. Takashi, B.  Lombardi, and  H.  Shinozuka, Inr. J.  Cancer, 29, 445 
[15] J.  N. Lapeyre and F.  F.  Becker, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 87, 
[I61 F? M.  Newberne, W.  W.  Carlton,  and  G. N.  Wogan, Pathol.  Vet., I, 
[I71 J.  A.  Stekol, in  Transmethylation and  Methionine  Biosynthesis ( S .  K. 
Shapiro and F.  Schlenk, eds.), University of  Chicago Press, Chicago, 
1965, pp.  231-252. 

(1978). 

( 1982). 

(1954). 

698 (1979). 

105 (1964). 

144 (1977). 

POIRIER 
196 
(181 L.  A.  Poirier,  F? H.  Grantham,  and  A.  E.  Rogers,  Cancer  Res..  37, 
(191 Y.  Mikol  and L.  A.  Poirier,  Cancer Lett.,  13,  195 (1981). 
[20] D. R.  Hoffman, J.  A.  Honig, and W.  E. Cornatzer, Can. J. Biochem.. 
(211 Y.  B.  Mikol,  K.  L.  Hoover,  D.  Creasia,  and  L.  A.  Poirier,  Carcino- 

59, 543 (1981). 
genesis,  4 ,  1619 (1983). 

412  (1982). 

Rex, 45, 2834 (1985). 

(1984). 
bardi , Carcinogenesis, I I ,  2053 ( 1990). 

(221 A. K.  Ghoshal and  E.  Farber,  Carcinogenesis.  5, 1367 (1984). 
(231 S.  Yokoyama,  M. A.  Sells, T.  V.  Reddy.  and  B.  Lombardi,  Cancer 
(241 T.  H.  Rushmore,  Y.  I?  Lim,  E.  Farber  et  al.,  Cancer  Lett.,  24, 251 
(251 S.  Banni,  M. G.  Salgo,  R. W.  Evans,  F.  P. Corongiu,  and  B.  Lom- 
1261  S. E.  Abanobi,  B.  Lombardi,  and  H.  Shinozuka.  Cancer  Res., 42, 
1271  M. C.  Poirier,  L.  A.  Poirier,  and  R.  Lepage.  Cancer  Res.,  32,  1104 
(281 N.  Sawada,  L.  A.  Poirier,  S.  Moran,  Y.-H.  Xu, and  H.  Pitot,  Car- 
[29] L.  I.  Hinrichsen,  E. C. Sudilovsky,  E.  Roggero,  S.-H.  Jiang,  and  0. 

(1972). 
cinogenesis, 11, 273 (1990). 
Sudilovsky,  Carcinogenesis,  14, in  press  ( 1993). 
[30] H.  Shinozuka,  S. L.  Katyal,  and  M. I.  R.  Perera,  in  Essential  Nutri- 
ents  in  Carcinogenesis (L.  A.  Poirier,  M.  W.  Pariza,  and I?  M.  New- 
berne,  eds.), Plenum  Press,  New  York,  1986, pp.  253-267. 
(311  N.  Shivapurkar, K. L.  Hoover,  and  L.  A.  Poirier,  Carcinogenesis,  7, 
(321 N.  Shivapurkar and  L. A.  Poirier,  Carcinogenesis,  4 ,   1051 (1983). 
1331 N.  Shivapurkar  and  L.  A.  Poirier,  Biochem.  Pharmacol.,  34,  373 
[34] N.  Shivapurkar and  L.  A.  Poirier,  Carcinogenesis,  4 .   173 (1983). 
[35] M. J.  Wilson,  N.  Shivapurkar,  and  L.  A.  Poirier,  Biochem  J., 218, 

[36] N.  Shivapurkar,  M. J.  Wilson,  and  L.  A.  Poirier,  Carcinogenesis, 5, 

989 (1984). 
(371 D.  Kanduc,  A.  Ghoshal,  E.  Quagliariello,  and  E.  Farber,  Biochem. 
Biophys. Res.  Commun..  150, 739 (1988). 
[38] R.  Pascale,  M. M.  Simile, M. E.  Ruggiu,  M. A.  Seddaiu, G. Satta, 
M. J.  Sequenza, L. Daino,  M. G.  Vannini,  P. Lai, and  F.  Feo, Cancer 
Lett., 56, 259 (1991). 
1391  L.  Hernandez,  F? T.  Allen,  L. A.  Poirier,  and  W.  Lijinsky,  Carcino- 
genesis,  10, 557 (1989). 

547 (1986). 

(1985). 

987 (1984). 

I97 
METHYL INSUFFICIENCY  IN CARCINOGENESIS 
[40] I?  K. Chiang and G. E. Cantoni, Biochem. Pharmacol., 28, 1897 (1979). 
[41] F? A.  Jones,  Cancer Res., 46, 461  (1986). 
[42] J.  K. Christman,  Curr. Top. fmmunol., 108, 49 (1984). 
[43] F? A.  Jones and J.  D.  Buckley, Adv. Cancer Rex, 54, 1  (1990). 
[44] A.  Denda,  F? M.  Rao,  S.  Rajalakshami  et  al.,  Fed.  Proc., 44,  411 
(451 B. I.  Carr,  J.  G.  Reilly,  S. S. Smith, et  al., Carcinogenesis, 5 ,  1583 
[46] M. L. McGeady, C. Jhappan,  R.  Ascione, et al., Mol. Cell. Biol., 3 ,  
[47] R. M.  Hoffman, Biochem. Biophys. Acfa, 738, 49 (1984). 
[48] A. F?  Feinberg and  B.  Vogelstein, Nature (Lond.), 301, 89 (1983). 
[49] M. R.  Bhave,  M. J.  Wilson,  and  L. A.  Poirier,  Carcinogenesis,  9 ,  

305  ( 1983). 

(1985). 

(1984). 

[50] W.  F.  Zapisek,  G. M.  Cronin,  B.  D.  Lyn-Cook,  and  L. A.  Poirier, 
[51] G. Cronin,  B.  D.  Lyn-Cook,  W. Zapisek,  and L. Poirier, Proc. Amer. 
[52] E.  Wainfan,  M.  Dizik,  M.  Stender,  and  J.  K.  Christman,  Cancer 

343  (1988). 
Carcinogenesis, 13,  1869 (1992). 
Assoc.  Cancer Res., 32, 147  (1991). 
REs., 49, 4094 (1989). 
[53] J.  K. Christman,  G. Sheikhnejad, M. Dizik, S. Abileah, and E. Wain- 
fan, Carcinogenesis, 14, 551  (1993). 
[54] M. Chandar, B. Lombardi, and J.  Locker, Proc. Narl. Acad. Sci.  USA, 
86, 2703  (1989). 
[55] R.  Garcea,R.  Pascale,  L.  Daino,  S.  Frassetto,  F?  Cozzolino,  M. E. 
Ruggiu, M. G. Vannini, L. Gaspa, and F.  Feo, Carcinogenesis, 8, 653 
(1987). 
[56] D.  B.  Soh,  A.  Medline,  and  E.  Farber,  Am.  J.  Parhol.,  88,  595 

[57] F.  Feo,  R. Garcea,  R.  Pascale,  L.  Pirisi,  L.  Daino,  and  A.  Donaera, 

(1977). 
Toxicol. Pathol., 15, 109 (1987). 
[58] R.  M.  Pascale,  V.  Marras,  M. M.  Simile,  L.  Daino,  G.  Pinna,  S. 
Bennati,  M. Carta, M.  A. Seddaiu, G. Massarelli,  and F.  Feo, Cancer 
Res., 52, 4979 (1992). 
[59] M. L.  Smith,  L.  Yeleswarapu,  I?  Scalamogna,  J.  Lockier,  and  B. 
Lombardi,  Carcinogenesis, 14, 503  (1993). 
[a] B. D.  Lyn-Cook,  G. M. Cronin, E.  Blann, and  L.  A. Poirier, privare 
communication. 
[61] T.  H.  Rushmore,  Y.  F?  Lim,  E.  Farber,  and  A.  K.  Ghoshal,  Cancer 
[62]  L.  I.  Hinrichsen,  R. A.  Floyd,  and  0. Sudilovsky,  Carcinogenesis, 

Left., 24, 251  (1984). 
1 1 ,  1879 (1990). 

(1982). 

(1992). 

POIRI ER 
198 
[63] R.  L. I? Adams and R. H.  Burdon, CRC Crit. Rev. Biochem., 13, 349 
[64] J.-C.  Shen,  W.  M.  Rideout  111,  and  I? A.  Jones,  Cell,  71,  1073 
[65] SW. J.  James,  L.  Yin,  and  M. E.  Swendseid,  J.  Nutr.,  119,  661 
[66]  M.  1.  R.  Perera,  J.  M.  Betschart,  M. A.  Virgi,  S. L.  Katyal,  and  H. 
[67] H. Shinozuka, S. E. Abanobi, and  B.  Lombardi, Environ. Health Per- 

(1989). 
Shinozuka, Toxicol. Pathol., 15, 5 1  (1987). 
specl., 50, 163 (1983). 
Konishi, Jpn. J. Cancer Res., 81, 1081 (1990). 
Science, 249,  1288 (1990). 

(1981). 

(1972). 

(1992). 

459 (1971). 

[68] D. Nakae, H.  Yoshiji,  H.  Maruyama,  T.  Kinugasa,  A.  Denda, and Y. 
[69] M.  W.  Rideout,  111,  G. A.  Coetzee,  A. F.  Olumi,  and  I?  A.  Jones, 
[70] E. V.  Selker, Ann. Rev. Genet., 24, 579 (1990). 
[71] C.  Kutzbach  and  E.  L.  R.  Stokstad,  Biochem.  Biophys.  Acta,  250, 
[72] S. J.  James,  D. R.  Cross,  and  B.  Miller,  Carcinogenesis,  13,  2471 
[73]  1.  Parsa, W.  H.  Marsh, and I? J.  Fitzgerald, Exper. Cell. Res., 73, 49 
[74] D. G. Scarpelli and M. S. Rao,  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 78, 2577 
[75] K. L. Hoover and L.  A. Poirier, J. Nurr.,  116,  1569 (1986). 
[76] B.  D.  Lyn-Cook,  J.  Owens, A. Andrews,  B.  Hass,  and L.  A.  Poirier, 
[77] B. D.  Lyn-Cook,  A.  Andrews,  E.  Blann,  and  K.  Fan,  Proc.  Amer. 

Proc. Amer. Assoc.  Cancer Res., 32, 286 (199 I). 
Assoc.  Cancer Res., 33,  122 (1992). 
[78] B.  D.  Lync-Cook,  K. C.  Ellwood,  J.  Nichols,  E.  Blann,  G. Cronin, 
L.  Poirier,  and  B.  D.  Roebuck, Proc. Amer. Assoc.  Cancer Rex, 34, 
133 (1993). 
I791  G .  Cronin,  L. C.  Rayford,  E.  Blann,  L.  A.  Poirier,  and  B.  D.  Lyn- 
Cook, Proc. Amer. Assoc.  Cancer Res.. 34,  133 (1993). 
[SO]  J. N.  Keating,  K. C. Trimble,  J.  M.  Scott,  and  D. G. Weir,  Lancer, 
337, 935 (1991). 
[Sl] R.  Surtees, K.  Hyland,  and I.  Smith, Lancet, 335, 619 (1990). 
[82] V.  Herbert,  W.  Fong, V.  Gulle, and T.  Stopler, Am. J. Hemarol., 334, 
132 (1990). 
[83] R.  L.  Blakely,  in  The  Biochemistry of  Folic Acid  and  Related  Com- 
pounds  (A.  Neuberger  and  E. L.  Tatum,  eds.),  Wiley,  New  York, 
1969, pp. 389-463. 

[84] S. H.  Zeisel, J. Nutr. Biochem., 1, 332 (1990). 

199 

METHYL INSUFFICIENCY  IN CARCINOGENESIS 
[85] A. E.  Rogers  and  M. W.  Conner,  in  Essential  Nutrients  in  Carcino- 
genesis (L. A. Poirier, M. W.  Pariza,  and I? M.  Newberne,  eds.), Ple- 
num  Press,  New  York,  1986, pp.  473-495. 
[86] V.  Herbert,  in  Essenrial  Nutrients  in  Carcinogenesis  (L. A.  Poirier, 
M. W.  Pariza,  and I?  M. Newberne,  eds.),  Plenum  Press,  New  York, 
1986,  pp.  293-311. 
[87]  F.  Feo, R. Pascale,  R. Garcea,  L. Daino, L. Piris, S. Frassetto,  M. E. 
Ruggui, C. D.  Di  Padova, and G. Stramentinoli,  Toxicol. Appl. Phar- 
macol., 83, 331 (1986). 
[88]  C. S.  Lieber,  A.  Casino,  L. M.  DeCarli,  C. I.  Kim,  N.  Lowe,  R. 
Sasaki, and  M.  A.  Leo, Heparology,  11, 165 (1990). 
[89]  G. Vendemiale, E.  Altomore,  T.  Trizio,  C. Le  Grazie,  C. Di  Padova, 
M. T.  Salerno,  V.  Carrieri  et  al.,  Scand.  J.  Gasrroenterol., 24, 407 
(1989). 
[90] R.  Pascale,  L.  Daino,  R.  Garcea,  S. Frassetto,  M. E. Ruggiu,  M. G. 
Vannini, I?  Cozzolino,  and F.  Feo, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 97, 216 
(1989). 
[91]  C. E.  Butterworth,  Jr.,  K. D.  Hatch,  H. Gore,  H.  Mueller, and  C. L. 
Krumdieck,  Am. J.  Clin. Nutr., 35, 73 (1982). 
[92]  D. C. Heimburger, B.  Alexander, R. Birch, C. E. Butterworth,  W. C. 
Bailey, and C. L. Krumdieck,  J. Am. Med. Assoc., 259,  1525 (1988). 
[93]  B.  A.  Lashner,  I? A.  Heidenreich,  G. L.  Su, S. V.  Kane,  and  S .  B. 
Hanauer, Gastroenterology, 97, 255  ( 1989). 
[94]  E. Giovannucci,  M. J.  Stampfer, G. A.  Colditz,  E.  B.  Rimm,  D. Tri- 
chopoulos,  B.  A.  Rosner,  F.  E.  Speizer,  and  W. C.  Willett,  J.  Nutl. 
Cancer Inst., 85, 875  (1993). 

[95]  R. L.  Walzem and  A. J.  Clifford, J. Nutr., 118,  1089 (1988). 
[96]  M. L. Cravo, J.  Mason,  R. N.  Salomon, J.  Ordovas, J. Osada, J.  Sel- 
hub,  and I.  H.  Rosenberg, FASEB J., 5, A914 (1991). 
[97]  M.  Balaghi  and C. Wagner, J. Nutr., 122,  1391 (1992). 
[98]  M. L.  Cravo,  J.  B.  Mason,  Y. Dayal,  M.  Hutchinson,  D.  Smith,  J. 

Selhub,  and I.  H.  Rosenberg,  Cancer Res., 52, 5002 (1992). 

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

Prevention and Epidemiology

Multivitamins, Folate, and Green Vegetables Protect against
Gene Promoter Methylation in the Aerodigestive Tract
of Smokers

Christine A. Stidley1, Maria A. Picchi2, Shuguang Leng2, Randy Willink2, Richard E. Crowell3,
Kristina G. Flores1, Huining Kang1, Tim Byers4, Frank D. Gilliland5, and Steven A. Belinsky2

Cancer
Research

Abstract

One promising approach for early detection of lung cancer is by monitoring gene promoter hypermethyla-
tion events in sputum. Epidemiologic studies suggest that dietary fruits and vegetables and the micronutrients
they contain may reduce risk of lung cancer. In this study, we evaluated whether diet and multivitamin use
influenced the prevalence of gene promoter methylation in cells exfoliated from the aerodigestive tract of
current and former smokers. Members (N = 1,101) of the Lovelace Smokers Cohort completed the Harvard
Food Frequency Questionnaire and provided a sputum sample that was assessed for promoter methyla-
tion of eight genes commonly silenced in lung cancer and associated with risk for this disease. Methyl-
ation status was categorized as low (fewer than two genes methylated) or high (two or more genes
methylated). Logistic regression models were used to identify associations between methylation status
and 21 dietary variables hypothesized to affect the acquisition of gene methylation. Significant protection
against methylation was observed for leafy green vegetables [odds ratio (OR) = 0.83 per 12 monthly servings; 95%
confidence interval (95% CI), 0.74–0.93] and folate (OR, 0.84 per 750 μg/d; 95% CI, 0.72–0.99). Protection against
gene methylation was also seen with current use of multivitamins (OR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.40–0.83). This is the first
cohort-based study to identify dietary factors associated with reduced promoter methylation in cells exfo-
liated from the airway epithelium of smokers. Novel interventions to prevent lung cancer should be developed
based on the ability of diet and dietary supplements to affect reprogramming of the epigenome. Cancer Res;
70(2); 568–74. ©2010 AACR.

Introduction

Lung cancer, the leading cause of cancer-related death in
the United States, occurs largely from chronic exposure to
tobacco carcinogens (1). The development of this disease
over 30 to 40 years involves field cancerization, characterized
as the acquisition of genetic and epigenetic changes through-
out the respiratory epithelium (2, 3). The silencing of genes
through promoter hypermethylation is now recognized as a
major and causal epigenetic event that occurs during lung
cancer initiation and progression to affect the function of
hundreds of genes. Gene silencing involves methylation of cy-

Authors' Affiliations: 1Department of Internal Medicine, University of
New Mexico; 2Lung Cancer Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research
Institute; 3Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico
School of Medicine, Medical Service, New Mexico VA Health Care System,
Albuquerque, New Mexico; 4University of Colorado Denver, Aurora,
Colorado; and 5Division of Environmental and Occupational Health, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer
Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Steven A. Belinsky, Lung Cancer Program,
Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, 2425 Ridgecrest Drive South-
east, Albuquerque, NM 87108. Phone: 505-348-9465; Fax: 505-348-
4990; E-mail: sbelinsk@LRRI.org.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410

©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

tosines in the gene promoter region, recruitment of tran-
scriptional corepressors, and modification of histone tails
that culminate in the establishment of chromatin modifica-
tions that block transcription (4, 5). Genes involved in all as-
pects of normal cell function, such as regulating the cell
cycle, differentiation, adhesion, and death, are silenced in
lung tumors (3). Importantly, the tumor suppressor gene
p16, which plays a critical role in regulating the cell cycle,
is not only commonly silenced by methylation in lung cancer
but also inactivated early in the development of this disease.
Silencing of p16 and other genes is detected in bronchial ep-
ithelium of smokers and in precursor lesions to adenocarci-
noma and squamous cell carcinoma and increases during
disease progression, substantiating a vital role for gene si-
lencing in lung cancer etiology (6–8).

Based on the silencing of key tumor suppressor genes in the
lungs of smokers, we hypothesized that the detection of gene-
specific promoter hypermethylation in exfoliated cells in
sputum would provide an assessment of the extent of field can-
cerization that in turn may predict early lung cancer. This
hypothesis has been validated in two studies, the first detecting
methylation of the p16 and MGMT genes in sputum up to 3
years before clinical diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma (9).
The second study, a nested, case-control study of incident
lung cancer cases from a high-risk cohort, identified six genes
associated with >50% increased lung cancer risk. Importantly,

568

Cancer Res; 70(2) January 15, 2010

Downloaded from 

Research. 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

concomitant methylation of three or more of these six genes
was associated with a 6.5-fold increased risk of incident lung
cancer and sensitivity and specificity both at 64% (10). These
studies suggested that gene promoter hypermethylation in spu-
tum could be used as a molecular marker for identifying people
at high risk for cancer incidence (11). However, the precise
mechanism by which carcinogens disrupt the capacity of cells
to maintain the epigenetic code during DNA replication and re-
pair is largely unknown.

The fact that gene promoter methylation is a promising
marker for lung cancer makes understanding factors that in-
fluence the propensity for this epigenetic process throughout
the respiratory epithelium a high priority because such
knowledge could be used not only for early detection but also
to identify persons who would benefit most from chemopre-
vention. The precise mechanism by which carcinogens dis-
rupt the capacity of cells to maintain the epigenetic code
during DNA replication and repair is largely unknown. Carci-
nogens within tobacco induce single- and double-strand
breaks in DNA, and reduced DNA repair capacity (DRC)
has been associated with lung cancer (12). Accumulating ev-
idence from our group suggests that extensive DNA damage
could be responsible for acquisition of gene promoter hyper-
methylation during lung carcinogenesis (3, 13). Strong sup-
port for this supposition was provided through a recent
community-based study in which a highly significant associ-
ation was seen between DRC and sequence variants within
specific DNA repair genes and the propensity for methylation
of genes detected in sputum from cancer-free smokers from
the Lovelace Smokers Cohort (14). Specifically, smokers with
a high methylation index (defined by having three or more
genes methylated from an eight-gene panel in sputum) had
a 50% reduction in DRC compared with smokers with no
genes methylated in sputum. Single nucleotide polymorph-
isms within five double-strand break DNA repair genes were
also highly associated with methylation index. This study
suggests that chronic DNA damage coupled with reduced
DRC could be an important determinant for inducing gene
promoter hypermethylation.

Epidemiologic studies suggest that select dietary nutrients
and vitamin supplements might protect against lung cancer
(15). Fruits, vegetables, and multivitamins all possess antiox-
idant activity that should reduce tobacco-induced DNA
damage. In addition, folate, a B vitamin, is metabolized to
5-methyltetrahydrofolate that provides methyl groups for S-
adenosylmethionine (SAM), a universal donor for reactions
that include methylation of DNA (16). Low folate has been as-
sociated with reduced DRC and an increase in prevalence for
gene promoter methylation (17, 18). The purpose of the cur-
rent investigation was to determine whether diet and multi-
vitamin use influence the presence of methylation in cells
exfoliated from the aerodigestive tract of current and former
smokers. Composite variables were selected based on our hy-
potheses that fruits, tomatoes, cruciferous vegetables, leafy
vegetables, yellow vegetables, and vitamin intake will be asso-
ciated with a reduction in number of genes methylated in
sputum, whereas animal fat and red and processed meat will
be associated with increased methylation.

Dietary Factors Protect against Gene Methylation in Smokers

Materials and Methods

Study population. The Lovelace Smokers Cohort began re-
cruitment of female smokers in 2001 and expanded to in-
clude male smokers in 2004 (14). Enrollment, which is still
ongoing, is restricted to current and former smokers ages
40 to 75 y with a minimum of 15 pack-years of smoking. Par-
ticipants primarily are residents of the Albuquerque, New
Mexico metropolitan area. Participants complete a standard
questionnaire covering demographics, smoking history, per-
sonal and family health, and a food frequency questionnaire.
Weight and height are measured. Participants provide both
blood and sputum samples and undergo standard pulmonary
function testing. A total of 1,145 people completed a food fre-
quency questionnaire and were assessed for prevalence for
methylation of eight genes in sputum. Those with caloric in-
take outside of gender-specific bounds (n = 44) were exclud-
ed, resulting in a total of 1,101 participants (845 women and
256 men) in this study. All participants signed a consent
form, and the Western Institutional Review Board approved
this project.

Dietary questionnaire. Participants completed the adult
version of the Harvard University Food Frequency Question-
naire Dietary Assessment form, a self-administered instru-
ment that includes ∼150 food items (19). The participant
indicates consumption frequency for most food items by
choosing 1 of 5 to 10 categories that vary depending on the
food item and can range from never to six or more servings
per day. A food group analysis was conducted to combine
food items to obtain estimates of intake of macronutrients
and micronutrients. We focused on factors known or sus-
pected of being associated with lung cancer or methylation.
Thus, the macronutrients animal fat and total fat and the
micronutrients vitamin C, vitamin E, folate (that included
supplements and fortified foods), carotene, α-carotene, β-
carotene, lycopene, lutein and zeaxanthin, and retinol were
examined. Alcohol, multivitamins, and cod liver oil intake
were also assessed as categorical variables. In a study of
eating patterns, Fung and colleagues (20) created a set of
38 composite variables using the food frequency question-
naire. Six of these composite variables, red and processed
meats, fruit, tomatoes, cruciferous vegetables, leafy green
vegetables, and yellow vegetables, were related to our hy-
potheses, so we calculated these variables.

Total caloric intake was assessed. People with either ex-
tremely low (n = 8) or extremely high (n = 36) intake were
excluded. Cutoffs for extremely low intake were <500 and
<800 calories for women and men, respectively. Extremely
high intake was defined as >3,500 and >4,200 calories for
women and men, respectively. It is standard to exclude par-
ticipants with at least 70 missing items on the food frequency
questionnaire, but none of our participants met this criteri-
on. Participants with missing data on individual food items
were excluded from analyses of these items.

Methylation-specific PCR. Eight genes (p16, MGMT, DAPK,
RASSF1A, PAX5α, PAX5β, GATA4, and GATA5) were selected
for analysis of methylation in sputum based on our previous
studies establishing their association with risk for lung

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 70(2) January 15, 2010

569

Downloaded from 

Research. 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

Stidley et al.

cancer (10, 21). DNA was isolated from sputum and modified
with bisulfite as described (10). Nested methylation-specific
PCR was used to detect methylated alleles from individual
genes in DNA recovered from the sputum samples as de-
scribed (21). Methylation index, the number of genes meth-
ylated in a sputum sample, was also defined. Sputum from
males and females was randomly selected and included in
batches of 96 samples for assessment of gene methylation.
A Hamilton robot was used to assemble PCRs in 96-well
plates.

Covariates. The questionnaire included questions on
gender, age, ethnicity, and smoking. Cigarette smoking histo-
ry included current status (former or current), pack-years,
and duration of smoking. Body mass index (BMI) was calcu-
lated from measured height and weight and categorized as
normal (<25 kg/m2), overweight (25–29.9 kg/m2), and obese
(≥30 kg/m2). Age was categorized as 40 to 54, 55 to 64, and
≥65 y. Pack-years of smoking were categorized as light (<29),
moderate (30–49), and heavy (≥50).

Statistical methods. Demographic, dietary, and methyla-
tion variables were summarized overall and by gender. Pro-
portions were used for categorical variables and medians
with the interquartile range (IQR) for continuous variables.
Differences between men and women in clinical covariates
and categorical dietary variables were assessed with Fisher's
exact test. For continuous dietary variables, a two-step linear
regression analysis was used to account for differences in to-
tal caloric intake between genders. In the first step, the die-
tary variable was regressed on the total caloric intake. In the
second step, the residuals from the first analysis were re-
gressed on gender, which resulted in an estimate of the dif-
ferences in the mean dietary variable after adjustment for
total caloric intake, along with 95% confidence intervals
(95% CI).

The total number of methylated genes in the eight-gene
panel was dichotomized into low (fewer than two genes
methylated) and high (two or more genes methylated). This
binary outcome, methylation status, was modeled with logis-
tic regression. Initially, only the clinical covariates gender,
age, BMI, and three smoking variables (status, pack-years,
and duration) were assessed. Interactions among the covari-
ates, including interactions with gender, were evaluated. Af-
ter the development of a model with only clinical covariates,
individual dietary variables were included, along with adjust-
ment for total caloric intake. Continuous variables, such as
total fat intake, were included as a continuous variable or
were categorized into quartiles, with the quartiles defined
by gender and the quartile medians used as the predictor va-
lues. Interactions between dietary variables and clinical cov-
ariates were assessed. Only the 21 dietary variables specific to
our hypothesis were examined to reduce the potential for
false-positive results. In addition, no formal adjustment for
multiple comparisons was made to reduce the chance of
false-negative results because this is one of the first studies
to examine the association between dietary factors and
methylation. However, the issue of examining multiple pre-
dictor variables is considered in the interpretation of the re-
sults. Methylation index was also used as the outcome

variable to further assess the association between methyla-
tion and dietary factors. Because the methylation index could
theoretically take on nine values, but actually took on only
seven, it was unclear that linear regression would be appro-
priate. Thus, results obtained from linear and ordinal logistic
regression were compared. The association between signifi-
cant dietary factors and each of the individual genes was ex-
plored using logistic regression models but viewed as
secondary analyses to reduce the issue of multiple compari-
sons. All statistical analyses were conducted in Statistical
Analysis System 9.2.

Results

Population characteristics. The demographics and smok-
ing history of the 1,101 participants are described in Table 1.
The Lovelace Smokers Cohort is largely composed of females
(76.7%) and non-Hispanic whites (77.8%). Median age was 56
years, with males slightly older than females. More than half of
the participants currently smoked, and median duration of
smoking was 33 years. There was no difference between
men and women with regard to smoking status or duration,
but men had significantly higher pack-years of smoking
(median = 39 pack-years for men versus 34 pack-years for
women).

Summary of dietary intake. The completion rate of the
food frequency questionnaire was excellent, as only 2.7% of

Table 1. Characteristics of study participants
overall and by gender: frequencies (%)

Demographic
characteristic
Sample size

Age (y)

Ethnicity†

Other
Smoking status Current
Duration of
smoking

Pack-years of
smoking

BMI

Overall Females Males

P*

1,101

845

256

40–54
46.0
55–64
31.8
65+
22.3
NHW 77.8
Hispanic 16.8
5.4
56.7
35.0
38.7
26.3
35.6
40.7
23.7
31.7
37.7
30.6

<30
30–40
40+
15–29
30–49
50+
<25

25–29.9
30.0+

46.7
32.7
20.6
77.5
17.5
5.0
56.7
35.9
38.1
26.0
38.7
40.4
20.9
32.5
36.7
30.8

0.36

0.06

1.00
0.53

43.4
28.9
27.5
78.7
14.6
6.7
56.6
32.0
40.6
27.3
25.4 <0.001
41.8
32.8
28.9
41.0
30.1

0.40

Abbreviation: NHW, non-Hispanic white.
*Comparison of females and males, from Fisher's exact
test.
†Ethnicity is not reported for six participants.

570

Cancer Res; 70(2) January 15, 2010

Cancer Research

Downloaded from 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

Research. 

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

Dietary Factors Protect against Gene Methylation in Smokers

Table 2. Summary and differences of dietary intake by gender

Dietary factor

Macronutrients§

Total caloric intake (kcal)
Total fat (g)
Animal fat (g)
Micronutrients§

Vitamin C (mg)
Folate (μg)
Vitamin E (mg)
Carotene (IU)
α-Carotene (μg)
β-Carotene (μg)
Lycopene (μg)
Lutein and Zeaxanthin (μg)
Retinol (IU)
Food groups∥

Red and processed meats
Fruit
Tomatoes
Cruciferous vegetables
Leafy green vegetables
Yellow vegetables

Alcohol

Drinks per day (%)

None
0.1–1.0
>1

Multivitamin use (%)

Never
Past
Current
Current cod liver oil use (%)

Females (n = 845)*

Males (n = 256)*

Adjusted difference (95% CI)†

P‡

1,688 (1,312–2,121)

1,975 (1,517–2,600)

69 (52–91)
33 (23–45)

78 (60–104)
38 (26–53)

185 (88–668)
985 (423–1,298)
23 (8–191)

181 (84–623)

1,038 (479–1,408)

21 (8–40)

5,599 (3,419–9,921)

5,334 (3,026–8,510)

357 (176–641)

3,095 (1,912–5,518)
4,991 (3,242–8,283)
2,315 (1,326–3,612)
3,736 (1,512–6,072)

370 (146–585)

2,925 (1,592–4,621)
5,968 (3,655–9,665)
2,059 (1,138–3,097)
3,683 (1,613–6,106)

20 (12–34)
19 (9–37)
12 (5–17)
5 (3–9)
13 (5–25)
5 (3–12)

30
57
13

13
24
63
1.7

28 (16–50)
19 (8–38)
13 (5–17)
5 (3–9)
10 (5–18)
4 (2–9)

22
48
31

18
21
61
2.0

3.5 (1.1–5.9)
0.9 (−0.9 to 2.6)

71 (3–140)
28 (57–112)
23 (8–38.5)

1,568 (761–2,374)
127 (50–1,349)
891 (432–1,349)
−320 (−968 to 328)
844 (476–1,213)
505 (−120 to 1,129)

−4.1 (−6.4 to −1.9)
5.3 (1.1–9.6)
0.5 (−1.0 to 1.9)
1.5 (0.3–2.8)
5.7 (3.6–7.9)
3.1 (1.8–4.4)

<0.001
0.004
0.33

0.04
0.52
0.003
<0.001
0.001
<0.001

0.33

<0.001

0.11

<0.001

0.01
0.54
0.01

<0.001
<0.001

<0.001

0.19

0.78

*Summary statistics are medians (IQRs) for continuous variables and percents for categorical variables.
†Differences are calculated as mean for females minus mean for males after adjustment for total caloric intake.
‡P values are obtained from linear regression after adjustment for total caloric intake or, for those variables without adjustment,
from linear regression for total caloric intake and from Fisher's exact test for categorical variables.
§Daily intake.
∥Servings per month.

participants failed to respond to >10 items. Dietary informa-
tion was compiled for the 21 items of particular interest to
this study and included three macronutrients, nine micronu-
trients, six serving variables, and three categorical variables
(Table 2). The selection of these variables was based on our
hypotheses that fruits, tomatoes, cruciferous vegetables, leafy
vegetables, yellow vegetables, and vitamin intake will be as-
sociated with a reduction in number of genes methylated in
sputum, whereas animal fat and red and processed meat will
be associated with increased methylation. On average, men
had higher intake of total calories, but after adjustment for
caloric intake, women generally had higher consumption of
micronutrients and men had higher consumption of red
meat. There was no difference in vitamin usage, but men

were more likely to report having at least one alcoholic drink
per day.

Prevalence for gene promoter hypermethylation in
sputum. Methylation of an eight-gene panel that included
p16, MGMT, DAPK, RASSF1A, GATA4, GATA5, PAX5α, and
PAX5β was evaluated. Methylation of these genes is associated
with increased risk for lung cancer (10, 21). The prevalence
of methylation ranged from 1.1% and 0.0% for RASSF1A to
33.8% and 51.2% for GATA4 for women and men, respectively
(Table 3). Three genes, MGMT, GATA4, and PAX5α, were more
frequently methylated among men than women (P < 0.001).
Methylation index, the number of methylated genes in each
sputum sample, was higher in men than women (median =
2 and 1, respectively; P < 0.001). Our previous study was

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 70(2) January 15, 2010

571

Downloaded from 

Research. 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

Stidley et al.

Table 3. Prevalence of gene methylation in
sputum

Gene

P16
MGMT
RASSF1A
DAPK
GATA4
GATA5
PAX5α
PAX5β
≥2 genes
methylated

Overall
(N = 1,101)

Females
(n = 845)
(% positive)

Males
(n = 256)

P*

16.6
26.3
0.8
17.8
37.9
18.0
15.3
9.6
39.8

16.2
24.4
1.1
16.7
33.8
17.0
13.1
9.5
36.6

0.50
18.0
0.009
32.8
0.13
0.0
21.5
0.09
51.2 <0.001
21.1
0.14
22.3 <0.001
10.2
0.72
50.4 <0.001

*Comparison of females and males, from Fisher's exact
test.

composed largely of male participants and dichotomized
methylation index as fewer than three or three or more
genes methylated in sputum (10). However, because this
study is composed of 77% women who have a lower prev-
alence for gene methylation, high methylation index was de-
fined as two or more genes methylated and was present in
sputum from 36.6% of women and 50.4% of men (P < 0.001).
Association of clinical covariates with gene methylation.
Gender, age, BMI, and cigarette smoking history were as-
sessed in a multivariate model for association with methyla-
tion status. Meaningful interactions, including interactions
between gender and all of the other covariates, were as-
sessed. There were significant interactions between gender
and both BMI (P = 0.04) and pack-years of smoking (P =
0.05). There were relatively more women with high methyla-
tion among obese participants than among both normal
weight and overweight individuals, whereas for men the as-
sociation was less consistent. The odds of high methylation
increased with pack-years among men, but there was no as-
sociation among women. Age and duration of smoking were

not associated with methylation, after adjustment for the
other clinical covariates, but age was retained in the model.
With two other smoking variables included in the model
(pack-years and current status), duration was excluded.
Thus, the clinical covariates that were included in the mod-
eling with the nutritional variables were gender, pack-years
of smoking, current smoking status, BMI, age, and interac-
tions between gender and both pack-years and BMI.

Association of dietary factors with gene methylation.
Each dietary factor was assessed for association with
methylation status (two or more genes methylated versus
fewer than two genes) using logistic regression. A total of
21 variables were examined: three macronutrients, nine mi-
cronutrients, six serving variables, and three categorical
variables (consumption of alcohol, vitamins, and cod liver
oil; Table 4; Supplementary Table S1). Leafy green vegetable
consumption was significantly associated with reduced risk
for high methylation status [odds ratio (OR), 0.83; 95% CI,
0.74–0.93], as was higher folate (OR, 0.84; 95% CI, 0.72–0.99;
Table 4). The most striking effect seen was the association
between current multivitamin use and methylation status
(OR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.40–0.83; Table 4). The duration of
vitamin use was not associated with methylation (data
not shown). Moreover, because folate levels were higher
for participants taking multivitamins, stratification by vita-
min use was also conducted and folate remained signifi-
cantly associated with methylation. There was a marginal
increase in odds for methylation associated with total fat
and animal fat that did not reach statistical significance
(Supplementary Table S1). None of the other dietary or
nutrient predictor variables analyzed were associated with
methylation (Supplementary Table S1). Interactions be-
tween each dietary variable and gender were assessed, but
none was significant. The association between these dietary
variables and methylation of the individual genes also was
examined, but because of the number of tests (8 genes × 3
dietary variables = 24 tests), these results were viewed as
exploratory. Associations with at least one of the three sig-
nificant dietary variables were observed for DAPK, GATA4,
PAX5α, and PAX5β (Supplementary Table S2).

A further analysis was conducted to assess whether
any extreme outliers influenced the observed results for

Table 4. Dietary variables significantly associated with methylation status in the Lovelace Smokers
Cohort

Dietary predictor variable

Leafy green vegetables (per 12 monthly servings)
Folate (per 750 μg/d)
Multivitamin use versus never

Current
Past

OR* (95% CI)

0.83 (0.74–0.93)
0.84 (0.72–0.99)

0.57 (0.40–0.83)
0.68 (0.45–1.03)

P

<0.001

0.04

0.01

*ORs are obtained from models with a single dietary variable but including adjustment for gender, age, BMI, pack-years of smoking,
current smoking status, total caloric intake, and interactions between gender and both BMI and pack-years of smoking.

572

Cancer Res; 70(2) January 15, 2010

Cancer Research

Downloaded from 

Research. 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

continuous variables by defining quartiles by gender and
then using the medians within the quartiles as predictors
in logistic regression modeling. Similar results were obtained
as in the initial analysis, except that total fat was associated
with marginally increased methylation (OR, 1.43 per 40 g/d;
95% CI, 1.03–1.99). The same dietary variables were identified
to be significant in analyses that used the continuous meth-
ylation index as the outcome. In addition, vitamin E showed
a protective effect for methylation per gene (OR, 0.98 per 20
mg/d; 95% CI, 0.96–1.00; P = 0.04).

Discussion

This is the first cohort-based study to systematically eval-
uate the association between dietary factors and risk for
methylation in cells exfoliated from the aerodigestive tract
of smokers and former smokers. Our findings support a sig-
nificant, biologically plausible role for leafy green vegetables,
folate, and multivitamin use in protection against the acqui-
sition of gene promoter methylation.

There has been considerable interest and debate for dec-
ades about the effect of diet and vitamins on the risk for can-
cer. Recent large epidemiologic studies along with functional
investigations are beginning to provide a clearer picture as to
the dietary variables that may influence risk for cancers such
as lung where a clear causative environmental exposure in
the form of smoking has been established. Reduced folate in-
take has been associated with increased risk for lung cancer
in current and former smokers (22). A link between folate and
gene methylation exists through the role of 5-methyltetrahy-
drofolate in providing methyl groups for SAM, a key methyl
donor in the methylation of DNA. Higher folate has been as-
sociated with a lower prevalence for methylation of individ-
ual and total number of genes in colorectal tumors (17). This
finding was validated in a second study of colorectal tumors
in which folate was inversely associated with gene-specific
promoter hypermethylation (23). Our study shows for the
first time that the acquisition of gene promoter methylation
throughout the airway epithelium is influenced by folate. The
biological mechanisms related to low folate and hypermethy-
lation are still unclear; however, Jhaveri and colleagues (24)
suggested that folate deficiency leads to increased levels of
SAM and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), an inhibitor of
SAM. The increase in free intracellular SAM could contribute
to gene-specific hypermethylation if an absolute level of SAH
needed to regulate SAM is not maintained. Folate is also in-
volved in DNA repair through de novo synthesis of purines
and pyrimidines, and low dietary folate has been associated
with reduced DRC (18). This observation, combined with our
recent study identifying reduced DRC as a determinant for gene
promoter methylation in sputum (14), suggests that folate may
directly, through affecting the one-carbon pool, and indirectly,
by affecting DRC, affect the propensity for methylation.

Green leafy vegetables were the only food item in this anal-
ysis to exhibit protection against methylation status. Leafy
vegetables are rich in phytochemicals such as vitamin C,
carotenoids, lutein, and folic acid in addition to vitamins A
and K. A comprehensive and systematic review of the litera-

Dietary Factors Protect against Gene Methylation in Smokers

ture up to 2007 by the World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF)
concluded that probable evidence existed for reduction of
lung cancer risk among persons with higher intake of fruits,
whereas evidence was inconclusive about green leafy vegeta-
bles (15). However, a recent hospital-based case-control
study of lung cancer (25) showed a strong protective effect
of green leafy vegetables (OR, 0.5; 95% CI, 0.3–0.81). The lack
of an effect of cruciferous vegetable on methylation status in
our study is not surprising because lung cancer observational
studies report only modest effects that may be influenced by
genetic variation (26). In addition, the lack of association
with red meat and processed meat intake is consistent with
the inconclusive evidence, as summarized by the WCRF (15).
However, a recent cohort study has observed increased risk
for lung cancer among those consuming meats prepared in
ways that would be expected to have increased their carcino-
genicity (27).

In our study, strong protection against gene methylation
was also associated with the use of multivitamins that contain
some of the same agents as leafy green vegetables. Although a
clear connection between vitamin supplements and risk of
lung cancer has not been established (28), vitamin supple-
mentation has been associated with reduction in DNA dam-
age by benzo(a)pyrene, a major tobacco carcinogen (29–32).
The silencing of genes by promoter hypermethylation is
now well established as a major component of lung cancer
initiation and progression and has emerged as a potential
disease marker for early detection. The ability to affect repro-
gramming of the epigenome through diet and chemopreven-
tive supplements could significantly affect mortality from
lung cancer. This study has identified two dietary variables,
leafy green vegetables and folate, along with multivitamin
use that could help reduce the incidence of lung cancer by
reducing the induction of methylation in the aerodigestive
tract of smokers.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

S.A. Belinsky is a consultant and has licensed intellectual
property with Oncomethylome Sciences. The other authors
disclosed no potential conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgments

We thank Kieu Do and Amanda Bernauer for assistance in the
conduct of gene methylation assays in the sputum specimens.

Grant Support

NIH grant U01 CA097356 and the State of New Mexico as a
direct appropriation from the Tobacco Settlement Fund, and
in part by the New Mexico VA Health Care System.

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in
part by the payment of page charges. This article must
therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

Received 9/15/09; revised 10/28/09; accepted 11/4/09;

published OnlineFirst 1/12/10.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 70(2) January 15, 2010

573

Downloaded from 

Research. 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

Stidley et al.

References
1.

Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Thun MJ. Cancer statis-
tics. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:43–66.

2. Slaughter DP, Southwick HW, Smejkal W. Field cancerization in oral
stratified squamous epithelium; clinical implications of multicentric
origin. Cancer 1953;6:963–8.

3. Belinsky SA. Silencing of genes by promoter hypermethylation: key
event in rodent and human lung cancer. Carcinogenesis 2005;26:
1481–7.
Jones PA, Baylin SB. The epigenomics of cancer. Cell 2007;128:
683–92.

4.

5. Brock MV, Herman JG, Baylin SB. Cancer as a manifestation of ab-

errant chromatin structure. Cancer J 2007;13:3–8.

6. Belinsky SA, Palmisano WA, Gilliland FD, et al. Aberrant promoter
methylation in bronchial epithelium and sputum from current and for-
mer smokers. Cancer Res 2002;62:2370–7.

7. Belinsky SA, Nikula KJ, Palmisano WA, et al. Aberrant methylation of
p16INK4a is an early event in lung cancer and a potential biomarker for
early diagnosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:11891–6.
Licchesi JD, Westra WH, Hooker CM, Herman JG. Promoter hyper-
methylation of hallmark cancer genes in atypical adenomatous hy-
perplasia of the lung. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:2570–8.

8.

9. Palmisano WA, Divine KK, Saccomanno G, et al. Predicting lung can-
cer by detecting aberrant promoter hypermethylation in sputum.
Cancer Res 2000;60:5954–8.

10. Belinsky SA, Liechty KC, Gentry FD, et al. Promoter hypermethyla-
tion of multiple genes in sputum precedes lung cancer incidence in a
high-risk cohort. Cancer Res 2006;66:3338–44.

11. Belinsky SA. Gene promoter hypermethylation as a biomarker in lung

cancer. Nat Rev 2004;4:707–17.

12. Shen H, Spitz MR, Qiao Y, et al. Smoking, DNA repair capacity and

risk of nonsmall cell lung cancer. Int J Cancer 2003;107:84–8.

13. Belinsky SA, Klinge DM, Liechty KC, et al. Plutonium targets the p16
gene for inactivation by promoter hypermethylation in human lung
adenocarcinoma. Carcinogenesis 2004;25:1063–7.

14. Leng S, Stidley C, Willink R, et al. Double-strand break damage and
associated DNA repair genes predispose smokers to gene methyla-
tion. Cancer Res 2008;68:3049–56.

15. World Cancer Research Fund (WCRF) and the American Institute for
Cancer Research (AICR). Food, nutrition, physical activity, and the
prevention of cancer: a global perspective. Washington (DC): AICR;
2007.

16. Jennings E. Folic acid as a cancer-preventing agent. Med Hypothe-

ses 1995;45:297–303.

17. van Engeland M, Weijenberg MP, Roemen GM, et al. Effects of die-
tary folate and alcohol intake on promoter methylation in sporadic
colorectal cancer: the Netherlands cohort study on diet and cancer.
Cancer Res 2003;63:3133–37.

18. Wei Q, Shen H, Wang L-E, et al. Association between low dietary
folate intake and suboptimal cellular DNA repair capacity. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2003;12:963–9.

19. Rimm EB, Giovannucci EL, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Litin LB, Willett
WC. Reproducibility and validity of an expanded self-administrated
semiquantitative food-frequency questionnaire among male health
professionals. Am J Epidemiol 1992;135:1114–26.

20. Fung TT, Hu FB, Holmes MD, et al. Dietary patterns and the risk of

postmenopausal breast cancer. Int J Cancer 2005;116:116–21.

21. Belinsky SA, Klinge DM, Dekker JD, et al. Gene promoter methylation
in plasma and sputum increases with lung cancer risk. Clin Cancer
Res 2005;11:6505–11.

22. Shen H, Wei Q, Pillow PC, Amos CI, Hong WK, Spitz MR. Dietary
folate intake and lung cancer risk in former smokers: a case-control
analysis. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2003;12:980–6.

23. van den Donk M, van Engeland M, Pellis L, et al. Dietary folate
intake in combination with MTHFR C677T genotype and promoter
methylation of tumor suppressor and DNA repair genes in sporadic
colorectal adenomas. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007;16:
327–33.

24. Jhaveri MS, Wagner C, Trepel JB. Impact of extracellular folate levels

on global gene expression. Mol Pharmacol 2001;60:1288–95.

25. Dosil-Diaz O, Ruano-Ravina A, Gestal-Otero JJ, Barros-Dios JM.
Consumption of fruit and vegetables and risk of lung cancer: a
case-control study in Galicia, Spain. Nutrition 2008;24:407–13.

26. Lam TK, Gallicchio L, Lindsley K, et al. Cruciferous vegetable con-
sumption and lung cancer risk: a systematic review. Cancer Epide-
miol Biomarkers Prev 2009;18:184–95.

27. Lam TK, Cross AJ, Consonni D, et al. Intakes of red meat, processed
meat, and meat mutagens increase lung cancer risk. Cancer Res
2009;69:932–9.

28. Huang HY, Caballero B, Chang S, et al. Multivitamin/mineral supple-
ments and prevention of chronic disease. Evid Rep Technol Assess
(Full Rep) 2006;139:1–117.

29. Cho E, Hunter DJ, Spiegelman D, et al. Intakes of vitamins A, C and E
and folate and multivitamins and lung cancer: a pooled analysis of
8 prospective studies. Int J Cancer 2006;118:970–8.

30. Yang J, Wang L, Chen Z, et al. Antioxidant intervention of smoking-
induced lung tumor in mice by vitamin E and quercetin. BMC Cancer
2008;8:383.

31. Ruano-Ravina A, Figuerias A, Freireo-Garabal M, Barros-Dios JM.
Antioxidant vitamins and risk of lung cancer. Curr Pharm Des
2006;12:599–613.

32. Mooney LA, Madsen AM, Tang D, et al. Antioxidant vitamin supple-
mentation reduces benzo(a)pyrene-DNA adducts and potential can-
cer risk in female smokers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2005;
14:237–42.

574

Cancer Res; 70(2) January 15, 2010

Cancer Research

Downloaded from 

Research. 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410 

Multivitamins, Folate, and Green Vegetables Protect against
Gene Promoter Methylation in the Aerodigestive Tract of 
Smokers
(cid:160) 
Christine A. Stidley, Maria A. Picchi, Shuguang Leng, et al. 
(cid:160) 
Cancer Res(cid:160)

2010;70:568-574. Published OnlineFirst January 12, 2010.

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 
(cid:160) 

Updated version
(cid:160) 
Supplementary
Material
(cid:160) 

10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410
 

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:
(cid:160) 
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2010/01/12/0008-5472.CAN-09-3410.DC1
 
(cid:160) 

Cited articles
(cid:160) 
Citing articles
(cid:160) 

This article cites 31 articles, 15 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/2/568.full#ref-list-1
 
(cid:160) 
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
 
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/2/568.full#related-urls
(cid:160) 

E-mail alerts
(cid:160) 
Reprints and 
Subscriptions
(cid:160) 
Permissions
(cid:160) 

Sign up to receive free email-alerts

 related to this article or journal.

pubs@aacr.org
.

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at
(cid:160) 
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, use this link
.
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/2/568
Click on "Request Permissions" which will take you to the Copyright Clearance Center's (CCC)
Rightslink site. 
(cid:160) 

Downloaded from 

Research. 

cancerres.aacrjournals.org 

on June 11, 2018. © 2010 American Association for Cancer

