Experimental Oncology 32, 137–142, 2010 (September) 
Exp Oncol 2010
32, 3, 137–142
EVIDENCE FOR THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DIET AND CANCER

137

Nutritional Science Research Group, Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute, 

EPN 3157, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, 6130 Executive 

S.A. Ross

Blvd., MSC 7328 Bethesda, MD 20892-7328, USA

The relationship between diet and cancer has advanced in recent years, but much remains to be understood with respect to diet and dietary 
components in cancer risk and prevention. Evidence from clinical trial outcomes, epidemiological observations, preclincial models and 
cell culture systems have all provided clues about the biology of cancer prevention. Sequencing of the human genome has opened the door 
to an exciting new phase for nutritional science. There are also many advances in our understanding of the control of gene expression in 
eukaryotic cells that might impact cancer development, including mechanisms regulating chromatin structure and dynamics, epigenetic 
processes (DNA methylation, histone posttranslational modification), transcription factors, and noncoding RNA and evidence suggests 
that environmental factors such as diet influence these processes.  Unraveling the effects of bioactive food components on genes and their 
encoded proteins as well as identifying genetic influences on dietary factors is essential for identifying those who will and will not benefit 
from intervention strategies for cancer prevention. Additional research needs concerning diet and cancer prevention include: identification 
and validation of cancer biomarkers and markers of dietary exposure; investigation of the exposure/temporal relationship between food 
component intakes and cancer prevention; examination of possible tissue specificity in response to dietary factors; and examination of 
interactions among bioactive food components as determinants of response. Other emerging areas that require greater attention include 
understanding the link between obesity, diet and cancer, the interaction between diet and the microbiome, as well as how bioactive food 
components modulate inflammatory processes. Importantly, for the future of nutrigenomics, the “omics” (e.g., genomics, epigenomics, 
transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics) approach may provide useful biomarkers of cancer prevention, early disease, or nutritional 
status, as well as identify potential molecular targets in cancer processes that are modulated by dietary constituents and/or dietary patterns.
Key Words: diet, cancer, nutrigenomics.

There have been several advancements in our under-
standing of cancer at the molecular level. Growth factors, 
hormones, cytokines, oncogenes, viruses, bacteria, 
and carcinogens are among the factors that have been 
identified to initiate and promote cancer [1]. Many of the 
subcellular mechanisms that promote hyperprolifera-
tion, invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis have also 
been determined. The structure of the entire human 
genome consisting of almost 25,000 genes as well as 
the characterization of some of the genes that mediate 
tumorigenesis is also now evident. Furthermore, there 
are many advances in our understanding of the control 
of gene expression in eukaryotic cells that might impact 
cancer development, including mechanisms regulating 
chromatin structure and dynamics, epigenetic processes 
(DNA methylation, histone posttranslational modifica-
tion), transcription factors, and noncoding RNA. In spite 
of this significant increase in knowledge about cancer, 
the application of these advancements to cancer pre-
vention and treatment practice needs greater attention. 
Moreover, the incidence of certain cancers is projected 
to increase in the coming decades due to growing and 
aging populations in many countries. Thus, there is a 
need for effective preventive strategies for cancer. Im-

E-mail: rosssha@mail.nih.gov

Received: July 27, 2010.
*Correspondence: 
Abbreviations used: AMP — adenosine monophosphate; AMPK — 
AMP-activated protein kinase; BMI — body mass index; ER — 
estrogen receptor; GWAS — genome-wide association studies; 
MTHFR — methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase; PLP — pyridoxal-
phosphate; RFS — relapse-free survival; SELECT — Selenium and 
Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial; SNP — single nucleotide poly-
morphisms; VDR — vitamin D receptor; WHEL — Women’s Healthy 
Eating and Living; WINS — Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study.

portantly, dietary habits are recognized to be important 
modifiable factors influencing cancer risk and prevention. 
The World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute of 
Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR) summary of the available 
epidemiological evidence on food, nutrition, physical 
activity, and the prevention of cancer clearly support 
the suggestion that cancer incidence and death are po-
tentially avoidable by modification of the diet as well as 
by physical activity [2]. In addition to such observational 
evidence, both in vitro and in vivo studies have sug-
gested that several bioactive food components, such as 
phytochemicals found in plants [3] and fungochemicals 
found in mushrooms [4], are likely to alter susceptibility to 
cancer. In fact, both essential nutrients and non-essential 
bioactive food components, have been implicated in 
altering many of the pathways of cancer, including apop-
tosis, cell cycle control, differentiation, inflammation, 
angiogenesis, DNA repair, and carcinogen metabolism 
[5]. Findings from either human epidemiological or hu-
man and animal experimental studies suggest that the 
study design (e.g., cancer site, model system or popu-
lation, food constituent and/or total diet composition) 
may be an important determinant of the direction and 
magnitude of the response, but variation in biological 
response may also be involved. Nutritional genomics is 
an emerging multidisciplinary science that recognizes 
the potential of nutrients to act as signals to influence cell 
behavior and also should provide insights about variation 
in response. For example, variation in genetic influences 
on the diet due to gene polymorphisms (nutrigenetics) 
and/or dietary influences on gene expression (nutri-
tional transcriptomics), on DNA methylation and other 
epigenetic events (nutritional epigenetics) may account 

138 

Experimental Oncology 32, 137–142, 2010 (September)

for inconsistencies from study to study. Unraveling the 
effects of bioactive food components on genes and their 
encoded proteins as well as identifying genetic influences 
on these dietary factors is essential for identifying those 
who will and will not benefit from intervention strategies. 
Dietary recommendations will continue to be made at 
the population level, but the possibility for certain dietary 
recommendations to be customized to individual needs 
is an expectation of the future. Advances in the compre-
hension of the human genome and its regulation hold 
promise for such personalized nutrition. However, the 
diversity of human genetic backgrounds, individual nutri-
tion (e.g. differences in food composition, influences of 
culture and food preparation, and food processing) and 
the heterogeneity of pathways to disease and health will 
certainly present challenges to personalized nutrition.

Diet and cancer prevention clinical intervention 
studies. Evidence from clinical interventions for the rela-
tionship between diet and cancer has been mixed. Many 
of the placebo-controlled clinical trials, whether carried 
out with carotenoids [6, 7], folic acid [8], selenium [9] or 
other agents, have resulted in either null or inconclusive 
outcomes. A recent example is The Selenium and Vitamin 
E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT) which recruited over 
35,000 men age 50 and older to determine if two dietary 
supplements (200 μg/day of l-selenomethionine and 
400 IU/day of all-rac-alpha-tocopheryl acetate taken 
individually or together versus placebo) can protect 
against prostate cancer [9]. SELECT was stopped in 
2008 following a minimum of 7 years of supplementation 
when preliminary analyses showed no effect of selenium 
or vitamin E on the incidence of prostate cancer, and 
because there was a statistically non-significant increase 
in the number of prostate cancer cases among the men 
taking only vitamin E. In addition there was a small, but not 
statistically significant increase in the number of cases of 
adult onset diabetes in men taking only selenium. These 
were disappointing results because of the many years of 
positive findings from Phase I and II clinical trials indicat-
ing that both selenium and vitamin E had a strong poten-
tial for prostate cancer prevention. SELECT analyses for 
secondary endpoints will continue as data is finalized 
from study centers and other clinical studies are ongoing 
to help explain the findings. For example, a clinical trial to 
determine if different forms (selenomethionine and sele-
nium yeast) and doses of selenium tailored as a function 
of age are effective in inhibiting oxidative stress and other 
markers of risk for prostate cancer in healthy African 
American and white American men is being supported 
by NCI [http://projectreporter.nih.gov/project_info_de-
scription.cfm?aid=7878646&icde=4419435 ].

Evidence from epidemiologic cohort studies sup-
ported the initiation of many of the dietary supplement 
trials of specific nutrients for cancer prevention, but it 
is now thought that reducing these findings to specific 
nutrients has not generally worked in randomized control 
trials. The results suggest several interacting factors 
might be important in preventing cancer, including 
relative macronutrient density, food matrix, and com-
plex mixtures of bioactive food components (not limited 

to micronutrients), as well as nutrient form and dose 
as described above. Another speculation is that spe-
cific nutrient supplementation may be effective only in a 
population that is deficient in that nutrient, which was the 
case in the generally selenium deficient population of the 
Nutritional Prevention of Cancer study [10] but not in the 
SELECT population which was relatively selenium replete.
Results of the General Population Trial in Linxian, China 
demonstrated that individuals who received a supplement 
containing beta-carotene, vitamin E and selenium, had 
a 13% reduction in cancer mortality [11]. This study was 
conducted in a borderline-deficient population for various 
nutrients, thus, again it may be that supplementation is 
most likely to be beneficial for individuals who are low or 
deficient at baseline. In a recent publication of this cohort, 
post-intervention follow up indicated that the beneficial 
effects of selenium, vitamin E, and beta-carotene on 
mortality were evident up to 10 years after cessation of 
the supplementation program [12]. Interestingly, the 
benefits were greater in individuals who were < 55 years 
at the beginning of the intervention. Cancer risk appeared 
to increase in those who started supplement usage when 
55 years of age or older. These findings suggest that sus-
tained exposure may not always be necessary to bring 
about a desired outcome. It may also be that the observed 
response in risk as a function of age reflected differences 
in the frequency of neoplastic conditions.

The Aspirin/Folate Polyp Prevention Study investigat-
ed the effects of folate supplementation (at 1 mg/d folic 
acid, the synthetic form of folate) on the development 
of colorectal adenomas [8]. Overall, the investigators 
reported no effect of folic acid supplementation on the 
development of adenoma, the primary outcome. Unfor-
tunately, in subgroup analyses they found an increased 
risk of advanced lesions at the second follow-up. Also 
of concern was the finding that the risk of cancers other 
than colorectal cancer were significantly increased in the 
intervention, which was thought to be largely due to pros-
tate cancer. It was hypothesized that an explanation for 
the increased risk of advanced and multiple adenomas in 
the intervention group was that undetected early precur-
sor lesions were present in the mucosa of these patients 
(who are at increased adenoma risk), and that folic acid 
promoted growth of these lesions [13]. This hypothesis is 
consistent with experimental studies showing increased 
colorectal neoplasia when folic acid is administered after 
lesions are present. Thus, a greater understanding of 
the temporal relationships between diet and disease are 
needed to determine appropriate prevention strategies.
In addition to dietary supplement intervention stud-
ies dietary behavior/lifestyle interventions have also 
been examined. For example, studies to determine the 
efficacy of dietary change in reduction of breast cancer 
recurrence have also been conducted. Examples of 
such trials are the Women’s Healthy Eating and Living 
(WHEL) [14] and Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study 
(WINS) [15]. Both studies achieved significant reduc-
tions in energy from fat, and the WHEL Study achieved 
large increases in the consumption of vegetables, fruit 
and fiber. The WHEL study investigators observed no 

Experimental Oncology 32, 137–142, 2010 (September) 

139

significant association between diet and prognosis 
while a secondary analysis suggested that the dietary 
intervention reduced distal recurrences among the 
subgroup without hot flashes identified at baseline [16].
WINS examined postmenopausal women only and 
reported a 24% increase in relapse-free survival (RFS) 
in postmenopausal women with primary early-stage 
resected breast cancer who received standard cancer 
management. Of interest is that after eight years, the 
increase in RFS was greater in women with estrogen 
receptor (ER)-negative disease than women with ER-
positive disease. This finding was supported by both the 
Women’s Health Initiative [17] and should be considered 
for further investigation because of the burden of ER-
negative breast cancer. Both the WHEL and WINS studies 
suggested that dietary pattern may be effective within a 
subgroup of people studied [16]. Additional investigation 
of these sub-groups is warranted.

Controlled interventions may provide unexpected in-
formation because of the quantities of the test agent ex-
amined, the duration of the intervention or the subjects 
examined. Furthermore, variation in response within the 
cohort may reflect timing of the amount and duration 
of exposure to a specific bioactive food component 
and to its interactions with multiple food constituents, 
environmental factors, the genetics of the host, or a 
combination of these factors. Recently, basic nutrition 
studies have been deemed critical to determine novel 
cancer prevention strategies. In this regard, several 
preclinical models are currently available which can be 
used to determine the mechanism of action as well as 
efficacy of diet and bioactive food components [1]. Nu-
tritional genomics and omics approaches are also likely 
to assist in elucidating mechanisms, molecular targets 
and identifying appropriate intervention strategies.

Obesity, diet and cancer. During the past 20 years 
there has been a dramatic increase in the prevalence of 
overweight and obesity in the United States and many 
other countries. This increase impacts many conditions 
such as hypertension, cardiovascular disease, type 
2 diabetes mellitus, and some cancers. Obesity is a 
multi-factorial disorder affected by multiple genetic and 
environmental factors, in particular diet, nutrients and their 
interrelationships. Epidemiological evidence suggests that 
increased body mass index (BMI) is associated with an 
increased risk for cancers of the esophagus, pancreas, 
colon and rectum, endometrium, kidney and breast (in 
postmenopausal women), among others [18]. The bio-
logical mechanism that explains how obesity increases 
cancer risk may be different for different cancers and 
exact mechanisms are not known for any of the cancers. 
The metabolic consequences of obesity include elevated 
levels of IGF-1, insulin, adipokines, and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines and these alterations likely provide clues for 
the relationship between obesity and cancer [19]. For 
example, these metabolic changes result in activation 
of signaling pathways that culminate in activation of the 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and downstream 
proliferation and survival signals; altered steroid hormone 
metabolism, resulting in increased estradiol and other 

estrogen metabolites; and increased inflammation and 
oxidative stress, including activation of cytokine signal-
ing [20]. Other evidence indicates that increased risk of 
carcinogenesis is associated with decreased activity of 
adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein ki-
nase (AMPK) which is a major metabolic-sensing protein 
implicated in the prevention of metabolic disorders [21]. 
Activation of AMPK by bioactive food components is 
currently being investigated for the prevention of several 
diseases, including cancer. For example, the anticancer 
effects of the tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin-3-
gallate [22] and the phytoalexin resveratrol found in grapes 
[23] have recently been thought to be mediated via activa-
tion of AMPK. Thus, in addition to novel physical activity, 
behavioral and dietary intervention studies that focus on 
understanding the prevention of obesity, a current focus 
of nutrition, obesity and cancer research concerns the 
effects of diet composition and dietary constituents on 
the dysregulated signaling pathways described above.

Nutrigenetics. Genetic differences in taste prefer-
ence, food tolerance, and dietary constituent absorp-
tion and metabolism all potentially influence the effect 
of diet and bioactive food components on cancer risk. 
Among the various common types of alterations in DNA 
sequence, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
have been studied the most. If a SNP induces a modi-
fication of one important amino acid in the encoded 
protein sequence, this can alter the protein function/
activity  and  thus  the  pathway  or  process  involved. 
A modification in the gene promoter sequence can alter 
the promoter activity and thus the level of gene tran-
scription, resulting in altered encoded protein level and 
linked function. In other cases, no effect on protein level 
or activity can be observed. Thus, the functional impact 
from SNPs on the encoded protein could be variable. 
The strength of the biological impact will also depend 
on heterozygosity or homozygosity of the variant.

While there is a good deal of evidence that the fre-
quency of functional polymorphisms may influence the 
response to a variety of dietary components, there is a 
need to validate and verify these findings. Most findings 
are associated with single observations in an epidemio-
logical context and therefore need to be substantiated 
for their relevance and physiological significance in other 
settings. Additionally, thought needs to be given to the 
interaction of multiple genes in order to understand what 
is occurring within cells and ultimately being expressed 
in terms of cancer development and prevention. Ulrich 
and collaborators have highlighted this point for polymor-
phisms in folate-metabolizing enzymes that may be linked 
to cancer risk [24]. These investigators encourage the 
use of a pathway-based approach to data analysis to help 
differentiate the independent and combined effects of 
dietary intakes and genetic variability in folate metabolism. 
The use of haplotypes, which are a set of closely linked 
genetic markers present on one chromosome which tend 
to be inherited together, will likely offer a helpful solution 
for screening large populations. The importance of using 
haplotypes versus SNPs to examine the vitamin D receptor 
gene (VDR) gene has been reported [25]. In this example, 

140 

Experimental Oncology 32, 137–142, 2010 (September)

two subjects (A and B) have identical genotypes at three 
polymorphisms in the VDR (the Cdx2, the FokI, and the 
Bsm–Apa–Taq 3’UTR polymorphisms) but only differ in 
their particular combinations of alleles on chromosomes 
(i.e., their haplotypes). The result for subject B is that less 
«high-activity» VDR proteins (i.e., having the «F» allele) 
are expressed, which is expected to lower responses to 
vitamin D. Interestingly, if only one of the polymorphisms 
was tested, this difference would not have been perceived. 
Furthermore, if only the three individual polymorphisms 
were analyzed and the haplotypes not taken into account, 
these effects would also not have been recognized. Thus, 
not controlling for the underlying complexities in VDR poly-
morphisms, i.e., by not analyzing multiple polymorphisms 
and analyzing their haplotypes, can also help to explain 
contradictory results between studies.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) compare 
the complete DNA of people with a disease or condition 
to the DNA of people without the disease or condition 
and have recently been employed to identify genomic 
markers associated with different disease phenotypes. 
Unfortunately, replication in different populations to 
validate results has been a challenge and loci identified 
through such studies have been found to explain only 
a small portion of variability for a trait. Investigators are 
just beginning to model environmental factors, including 
diet, in GWAS [26]. These studies should help to provide 
an understanding of the complex interplay of genetic 
and environmental factors affecting human quantitative 
traits. Inclusion of environmental factors represents a 
much needed next step in the quest to model the com-
plete environmental and genetic architecture of complex 
traits. An interesting recent example for a GWAS, which 
has relevance for nutritional status, concerns associa-
tions between genetic variation and plasma one-carbon 
metabolites [27]. In this study, genome-wide significant 
associations for plasma homocysteine, plasma vitamin 
B12 and plasma pyridoxal-phosphate (PLP) were deter-
mined. For plasma vitamin B12, the investigators replicat-
ed an association for FUT2 and identified genome-wide 
significant SNPs in biological candidate genes: TCN1, a 
vitamin B12 binding protein; MUT, which converts meth-
ylmalonyl CoA to succinyl CoA; and CUBN, the receptor 
for intrinsic factor-vitamin B12 complexes. For plasma 
homocysteine, they observed genome-wide significant 
associations with the 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate 
reductase (MTHFR) functional SNP Ala222Val and a pos-
sible new independent locus 102 kb upstream of MTHFR. 
For plasma pyridoxal 5’-phosphate (PLP, the active form 
of vitamin B6), the investigators noted genome-wide 
significant associations in alkaline phosphatase. These 
data reveal new biological candidates and confirm prior 
candidate genes for plasma homocysteine, plasma vita-
min B12 and plasma PLP.

Copy number variation- a term used to describe 
gains and losses of segments of DNA- is another possi-
ble genetic difference influencing variation in biological 
responses and risk of disease. An example describing 
a relationship between diet and copy number variation 
is for the amylase gene. Investigators compared the 

copy number for the salivary amylase gene (AMY1) in 
individuals from populations consuming high-starch 
diets to those with traditionally low-starch diets [28]. 
They found higher AMY1 copy numbers and protein 
levels in populations that traditionally consume high 
starch diets. This example of positive selection on a 
copy number–variable gene is likely the first discovered 
in the human genome. Research approaches and tools 
are now available to enable characterization of the full 
extent of copy number variation in the human genome 
and their contribution to human variation and disease.
Nutritional epigenetics. The impact of epigenetic 
mechanisms in the etiology of cancer and other chronic 
diseases has been increasingly recognized in recent 
years. Epigenetics refers to the study of mitotically and/or 
meiotically heritable changes in gene function that are not 
attributable to a change in the DNA sequence. Evidence 
suggests that diet and other environmental factors may be 
significant regulators of epigenetic events. Bioactive food 
components have been shown to exert cancer protective 
effects through modulation of epigenetic mechanisms, 
such as DNA methylation of CpG islands in promoters 
and other regions of the genome, chromatin silencing 
complexes, post-translational modifications of histone tail 
domains, and regulation of non-coding RNAs. Moreover, 
dietary alteration of epigenetic events has been associated 
with modulation of several cellular processes associated 
with carcinogenesis, including differentiation, inflamma-
tion, apoptosis, cell cycle control/proliferation, carcinogen 
metabolism, and angiogenesis, among others.

A classic example for the influence of diet in DNA 
methylation  and  cancer  is  the  finding  that  dietary 
methyl (folate, choline and methionine) deficiency has 
been shown to alter hepatic DNA methylation patterns 
and induce hepatocarcinogenesis in the absence of a 
carcinogen in rodents [29].

Researchers recently evaluated whether diet and 
multivitamin use influenced the prevalence of gene 
promoter methylation in cells exfoliated from the aerodi-
gestive tract of current and former smokers [30]. In 
this study, members (n = 1,101) of the Lovelace Smok-
ers Cohort completed the Harvard Food Frequency 
Questionnaire and provided a sputum sample that was 
assessed for promoter methylation of eight genes com-
monly silenced in lung cancer and associated with risk 
for this disease. Methylation status was categorized as 
low (fewer than two genes methylated) or high (two or 
more genes methylated). Significant protection against 
methylation was observed for consumers of leafy green 
vegetables and folate as well as with current users of 
multivitamins. These findings support the concept that 
novel interventions to prevent cancer could be explored 
based on the ability of diet and dietary supplements to 
affect reprogramming of the epigenome.

Epigenomic approaches are likely to assist in char-
acterizing genome-wide epigenetic marks that are 
targets for dietary regulation. The ability to characterize 
cell and context specific epigenomes (be it profiles of 
DNA methylation or histone modifications) will greatly 
impact the ability to determine, on a global level, how diet 

Experimental Oncology 32, 137–142, 2010 (September) 

141

impacts differential epigenetic effects on normal versus 
cancer cells. This information will also provide the tools to 
illuminate epigenetic changes resulting from dietary ex-
posures during critical periods of prenatal and postnatal 
development, adolescence, and senescence, as well as 
examine the potential impact of diet on transgenerational 
transmission of epigenetic changes. In addition, relation-
ships between genetics and epigenetics may provide 
further insights about transcriptional regulation during 
carcinogenesis and how dietary factors participate in 
these interactions. Moreover, the identification and char-
acterization of novel epigenetic marks and mechanisms 
with the capacity to regulate gene expression are likely to 
surface over the next few years.

Nutritional  transcriptomics.  Modulation  of 
genomic and epigenomic processes do not fully ac-
count for the influence that dietary factors can have on 
phenotype since changes in the rate of transcription of 
genes (transcriptomics) may also be important. Tran-
scriptomics allows for genome-wide monitoring of the 
simultaneous expression of tens of thousands of genes 
as well as a comparison of relative expression between 
these genes. Messenger RNA microarray technologies 
provide an important tool to discover gene expression 
changes that are linked to cellular processes, however 
such responses are very likely to be cell type specific and 
may vary between healthy and neoplastic conditions, as 
well as during cancer progression. Several bioactive food 
components have been reported to significantly influ-
ence gene transcription and translation in a concentration 
and time dependent manner. These changes may be key 
links in the ability of food components to influence one or 
more biological processes including cellular energetics, 
cell growth, apoptosis, and differentiation, all of which are 
important in regulating cancer risk and consequences.
Adaptation to excess exposure to foods and their com-
ponents occurs through shifts in absorption, metabolism 
or excretion. Thus, the quantity and duration of exposure 
must be considered when evaluating the response of gene 
expression patterns. Over-interpretation of the physiologi-
cal significance of a gene expression pattern is possible 
because microarray technologies provide only a single 
snapshot in time. While mRNA microarray technology 
continues to be a powerful tool for examining potential 
sites of action of food components, their usefulness for 
population studies remains uncertain.

One study suggests the feasibility of using gene 
expression changes in human prostate epithelium as a 
measure of response to a dietary intervention [31]. A low-
fat/low-glycemic load diet, and its related weight loss, 
was associated with multiple gene expression changes 
in human prostate epithelium following a six-week diet. 
Gene expression changes were discovered in cell mi-
gration and tissue remodeling, including matrix metal-
loproteinase-7 (MMP7) (also called matrilysin), CXCR4, 
CXCL2, lumican, and SPARC-like 1 (Secreted Protein, 
Acidic and Rich in Cysteines-like 1). Other genes that 
were modified in expression involved in intracellular sig-
nal transduction, such as the immediate early response 
genes 2 and 3, the dual specificity phosphatase 1, and 

the v-ets oncogene homologue. Expression of insulin-
like growth factor-II receptor transcripts increased, per-
haps due to a positive feedback of the low-glycemic load 
diet. Genes that were down-regulated include prostate-
specific membrane antigen and peroxiredoxin 1, which 
may play an antioxidant protective role in cells. These 
results provide important information for future studies 
that aim to examine the impact of diet, obesity in prostate 
carcinogenesis and/or progression.

As an example of a biomarker investigation, re-
searchers found that a small group of women at in-
creased risk for breast cancer who followed an extreme 
900 calorie per day diet had reduced gene expression 
of stearoyl-CoA, a gene involved in cancer growth, 
compared to a control group on a 2000 calorie per day 
diet [32]. They also found changes in blood biomarkers 
(using a metabolomic profiling approach) for breast 
cancer risk (e.g., insulin, leptin). The researchers con-
cluded that the reduced expression of genes in lipid 
metabolism and glycolytic pathways were detectable 
in breast tissue following dietary energy restriction and 
that these may represent promising molecular targets 
for dietary energy restriction mimetics or during dietary 
intervention studies. Thus, transcriptomics approaches 
can assist in identifying and characterizing molecular 
biomarkers. Future studies of this nature may provide 
insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
associations of diet and obesity with the development 
or progression of certain cancers. Much of the current 
evidence, however, suggests that mRNA abundance 
is not always proportional to protein activity and thus 
cannot substitute for functional analyses of candidate 
genes. While the transcriptional profile can be useful 
in predicting metabolic stress, simpler indicators may 
suffice. It is possible that more select gene expression 
microarrays may be useful if targeted to some cellular 
process. At this point, however, it seems prudent to 
evaluate the costs and benefits of transcriptomics tech-
nologies before including this research approach into 
certain study designs, such as large population studies.

SUMMARY
Although our understanding of the relationship be-
tween diet and cancer has advanced in recent years, much 
remains to be revealed with respect to diet and dietary 
components in cancer risk and prevention. Evidence 
from clinical trial outcomes, epidemiological observa-
tions, preclincial models and cell culture systems have all 
provided clues about the biology of cancer prevention. 
Emerging areas such as the interaction between diet and 
the microbiome as well as how bioactive food compo-
nents modulate inflammatory processes require greater 
research attention. Issues remain about the quantity of di-
etary components and the optimal dietary pattern needed 
to bring about a biological effect, as well as the timing of 
exposure and other variables (chemical form, duration of 
exposure) that can influence the response. Interactions 
between the different components within a food may 
explain why isolated components do not always result in 
the same biological outcomes as does the intact food. 

142 

Experimental Oncology 32, 137–142, 2010 (September)

Likewise, interactions among foods and their constituents 
may contribute to the overall relationship between eating 
behaviors and cancer. Importantly, for the future of nutrig-
enomics, the «omics» (e.g., transcriptomics, proteomics, 
metabolomics) approach may provide useful biomarkers 
of cancer prevention, early disease, or nutritional status, 
as well as identify potential molecular targets in cancer 
processes that are modulated by dietary constituents 
and/or dietary patterns.

REFERENCES
1. Aggarwal  BB,  Danda  D,  Gupta  S,  et  al. Models for 
prevention and treatment of cancer: problems vs promises. 
Biochem Pharmacol 2009; 78: 1083–94.

2. World  Cancer  Research  Fund  /  American  Institute 
for  Cancer  Research.  Food,  Nutrition,  Physical  Activ-
ity, and the Prevention of Cancer: a Global Perspective. 
Washington  DC:  AICR,  2007.  http://www.aicr.org/site/
PageServer?pagename=research_science_expert_report.

3. Manson MM, Foreman, BE, Howells LM, et al. De-
termining the efficacy of dietary phytochemicals in cancer 
prevention. Biochem Soc Trans 2007; 35: 1358–6.

4. Adams LS, Phung S, Wu X, et al. White button mush-
room (Agaricus bisporus) exhibits antiproliferative and pro-
apoptotic properties and inhibits prostate tumor growth in 
athymic mice. Nutr Cancer 2008; 60: 744–56.

5. Davis CD, Milner JA. Molecular targets for nutritional 
preemption of cancer. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 2007; 7: 410–5.
6. The effect of vitamin E and Beta-carotene on the inci-
dence of lung cancer and other cancers in male smokers. The 
Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study 
Group. N Engl J Med 1994; 330: 1029–35.

7. Omenn GS, Goodman GE, Thornquist MD, et al. Effects 
of a combination of beta carotene and vitamin A on lung cancer 
and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 1996; 334: 1150–5.
8. Cole BF, Baron JA, Sandler RS, et al. Polyp Prevention 
Study Group. Folic acid for the prevention of colorectal ad-
enomas: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2007; 297: 2351–9.
9. Lippman SM, Klein EA, Goodman PJ, et al. Effect of 
selenium and vitamin E on risk of prostate cancer and other 
cancers: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial 
(SELECT). JAMA 2009; 301: 39–51.

10. Duffield-Lillico AJ, Reid ME, Turnbull BW, et al. Base-
line characteristics and the effect of selenium supplementation 
on cancer incidence in a randomized clinical trial: a summary 
report of the Nutritional Prevention of Cancer Trial. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2002; 11: 630–9.

11. Blot WJ, Li JY, Taylor PR, et al. Nutrition intervention trials 
in Linxian, China: supplementation with specific vitamin/mineral 
combinations, cancer incidence, and disease-specific mortality 
in the general population. J Natl Cancer Inst 1993; 85: 1483–92.
12. Qiao YL, Dawsey SM, Kamangar F, et al. Total and 
cancer mortality after supplementation with vitamins and 
minerals: follow-up of the Linxian General Population Nutri-
tion Intervention Trial. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009; 101: 507–18.
13. Ulrich CM, Potter JD. Folate and cancer — timing is 

everything. JAMA 2007; 297: 2408–9.

14. Pierce JP, Natarajan L, Caan BJ, et al. Influence of a diet 
very high in vegetables, fruit, and fiber and low in fat on prognosis 
following treatment for breast cancer: the Women’s Healthy Eating 
and Living (WHEL) randomized trial. JAMA 2007; 298: 289–98.

15. Chlebowski  RT,  Blackburn  GL,  Thomson  CA,  et  al. 
Dietary fat reduction and breast cancer outcome: interim ef-
ficacy results from the Women’s Intervention Nutrition Study. 
J Natl Cancer Inst 2006; 98: 1767–76.

16. Pierce JP. Diet and breast cancer prognosis: making sense of 
the Women’s Healthy Eating and Living and Women’s Intervention 
Nutrition Study trials. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 2009; 21: 86–91.
17. Prentice RL, Caan B, Chlebowski RT, et al. Low-fat 
dietary pattern and risk of invasive breast cancer: the Women’s 
Health Initiative Randomized Controlled Dietary Modifica-
tion Trial. JAMA 2006; 295: 629–42.

18. Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker-Thurmond K, et al. Over-
weight, obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively 
studied cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 1625–38.
19. van Kruijsdijk RC, van der Wall E, Visseren FL. Obesity 
and cancer: the role of dysfunctional adipose tissue. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2009; 18: 2569–78.

20. Hursting SD, Lashinger LM, Wheatley KW, et al. Re-
ducing the weight of cancer: mechanistic targets for breaking 
the obesity-carcinogenesis link. Best Pract Res Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 2008; 22: 659–69.

21. Luo Z, Zang M, Guo W. AMPK as a metabolic tumor 
suppressor: control of metabolism and cell growth. Future 
Oncol 2010; 6: 457–70.

22. Murase T, Misawa K, Haramizu S, et al. Catechin-
induced activation of the LKB1/AMP-activated protein kinase 
pathway. Biochem Pharmacol 2009; 78: 78–84.

23. Puissant A, Auberger P. AMPK- and p62/SQSTM1-
dependent autophagy mediate resveratrol-induced cell death 
in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Autophagy 2010; 6: 655–7.
24. Ulrich CM, Curtin K, Potter JD, et al. Polymorphisms 
in the reduced folate carrier, thymidylate synthase, or me-
thionine synthase and risk of colon cancer. Cancer Epidemiol 
Biomarkers Prev 2005; 14: 2509–16.

25. Whitfield GK, Remus LS, Jurutka PW, et al. Function-
ally relevant polymorphisms in the human nuclear vitamin D 
receptor gene. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2001; 177: 145–59.

26. Igl W, Johansson A, Wilson JF, et al. EUROSPAN Con-
sortium. Modeling of environmental effects in genome-wide 
association studies identifies SLC2A2 and HP as novel loci influ-
encing serum cholesterol levels. PLoS Genet 2010; 6: e1000798.
27. Hazra  A,  Kraft  P,  Lazarus  R,  et  al. Genome-wide 
significant predictors of metabolites in the one-carbon me-
tabolism pathway. Hum Mol Genet 2009; 18: 4677–87.

28. Perry GH, Dominy NJ, Claw KG, et al. Diet and the 
evolution of human amylase gene copy number variation. Nat 
Genet 2007; 39: 1256–60.

29. Poirier LA. Methyl group deficiency in hepatocarcino-

genesis. Drug Metab Rev 1994; 26: 185–99.

30. Stidley CA, Picchi MA, Leng S, et al. Multivitamins, folate, 
and green vegetables protect against gene promoter methylation in 
the aerodigestive tract of smokers. Cancer Res 2010; 70: 568–74.
31. Lin DW, Neuhouser ML, Schenk JM, et al. Low-fat, 
low-glycemic load diet and gene expression in human prostate 
epithelium: a feasibility study of using cDNA microarrays to 
assess the response to dietary intervention in target tissues. 
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2007; 16: 2150–4.

32. Ong KR, Sims AH, Harvie M, et al. Biomarkers of 
dietary energy restriction in women at increased risk of breast 
cancer. Cancer Prev Res 2009; 2: 720–31.

Copyright © Experimental Oncology, 2010

