Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect

Pharmacological   Research

j o u r n a  l  h  o  m e  p a  g e :  w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / y p h r  s

Review
Tea   and   cardiovascular   disease
Apranta   Deka, Joseph   A.   Vita∗

Evans  Department  of  Medicine  and  the  Whitaker  Cardiovascular  Institute,  Boston  University  School  of  Medicine,  Boston,  MA,   United  States

a

 

r

 

t

 

i

 

c

 

l

 

e

 

i

 

n

 

f

 

o

a

 

b

 

s

 

t

 

r

 

a

 

c

 

t

Article  history:
Received  27  December  2010
Accepted  22  March  2011

Keywords:
Tea
Polyphenols
Catechins
Flavonoids
Cardiovascular  disease
Endothelium

1.  Introduction

There   is  increasing   evidence   for   a   protective   effect   of   tea   consumption   against   cardiovascular   disease.
This   review   summarizes   the   available   epidemiological   data   providing   evidence   for   and   against   such   an
effect.  We   also   review   observational   and   intervention   studies   that   investigated   an   effect   of   tea   and   tea
extracts   on   cardiovascular   risk  factors,   including   blood   pressure,   serum   lipids,   diabetes   mellitus,   and
obesity.   Finally,   we   review   potential   mechanisms   of   beneﬁt,   including   anti-inﬂammatory,   anti-oxidant,
and   anti-proliferative   effects,   as  well   as   favorable   effects   on  endothelial   function.   Overall,   the   observa-
tional   data   suggest   a  beneﬁt,   but   results   are   mixed   and   likely   confounded   by   lifestyle   and   background
dietary   factors.   The   weight   of   evidence   indicates   favorable   effects   on   risk   factors   and   a  number   of   plau-
sible   mechanisms   have   been   elucidated   in   experimental   and   translational   human   studies.   Despite   the
growing   body   evidence,   it   remains   uncertain   whether   tea   consumption   should   be  recommended   to   the
general   population   or   to   patients   as   a   strategy   to  reduce   cardiovascular   risk.

© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Tea  leaves  are  obtained  from  the  Camillia  sinensis  plant.  Based
on  how  the  leaves  are  processed,  three  main  types  of  tea  can  be
produced:  non-fermented  green  tea,  partly  fermented  oolong  tea
and  fermented  black  tea.  Records  from  as  far  back  as  the  10th  cen-
tury  BC  indicate  use  of  tea  by  man,  largely  because  of  its  medicinal
value.  This  review  will  focus  on  possible  beneﬁcial  effects  against
cardiovascular  disease.

Tea  leaves  contain  a  large  amount  of  polyphenols  (about  30%  of
the  dry  substance),  mainly  ﬂavonoids.  The  major  class  of  ﬂavonoids
in  tea  are  ﬂavanols,  which  include  catechin,  epicatechin  (EC),  epi-
gallocatechin  (EGC),  epicatechin  gallate  (ECG),  and  epigallocatechin
gallate  (EGCG)  [1].   Total  polyphenol  content  is  similar  in  different
types  of  tea,  but  the  individual  components  vary,  based  in  part  on
the  degree  of  polyphenol  oxidation  during  the  manufacturing  pro-
cess.  Catechins  constitute  about  80–90%  and  ﬂavanols  about  10%
of  the  total  ﬂavonoids  in  green  tea.  On  the  other  hand,  theaﬂavins
account  for  50–60%  and  catechins  only  20–30%  of  total  ﬂavonoids
in  black  tea  [2].

Recently,  there  has  been  considerable  interest  in  the  possibil-
ity  that  consumption  of  tea  reduces  risk  for  cardiovascular  disease.
Some  observational  studies  suggest  a  beneﬁt  of  tea,  while  other
studies  have  failed  to  show  such  an  association.  Mechanistic  stud-

∗ Corresponding  author  at:  Boston  University  School  of  Medicine,  88  East  Newton
Street,  C-818,  Boston,  MA   02118,  United  States.  Tel.:  +1  617  638  8742;
fax:  +1  617  638  8712.

E-mail  address:  jvita@bu.edu  (J.A.  Vita).

1043-6618/$  –  see  front  matter © 
doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2011.03.009

 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

ies  have  shown  that  tea  and  tea  polyphenols  have  favorable  effects
on  systemic  risk  factors  and  direct  effects  on  the  vasculature  and
platelets  that  might  account  for  reduced  cardiovascular  risk.  In  the
following  sections,  we   will  summarize  the  supportive  and  non-
supportive  observational  studies  that  investigated  a  relationship
between  tea  consumption  and  cardiovascular  risk.  We   will  then
consider  experimental,  mechanistic  and  translational  studies  that
elucidate  potential  mechanisms  of  beneﬁt.  Finally,  we   will  attempt
to  put  these  data  into  clinical  context  given  the  considerable  inter-
est  in  dietary  and  lifestyle  approaches  to  reduce  cardiovascular
disease.

2.  Epidemiologic  studies  with  tea  and  cardiovascular
disease  events

A  large  number  of  cross-sectional  and  prospective  outcome
studies  investigated  the  relation  between  tea  consumption  and  car-
diovascular  disease.  In  addition  several  meta-analyses  have  been
performed  that  pool  these  data.  Overall,  the  evidence  suggests  a
beneﬁt,  for  both  green  and  black  tea,  but  the  results  may  be  con-
founded  by  lifestyle  and  other  dietary  factors.

Nearly  all  of  the  published  studies  examining  the  relation
between  green  tea  consumption  and  cardiovascular  risk  suggest
a  reduction  in  risk.  In  an  early  study  from  Japan,  Sato  et  al.  followed
a  cohort  of  5910  women  for  4  years  and  found  that  the  incidence  of
stroke  and  cerebral  hemorrhage  was   two  times  higher  in  those  with
daily  green  tea  consumption  less  than  ﬁve  cups  when  compared  to
those  with  more  than  ﬁve  cups  [3].   More  recent  studies  also  showed
a  beneﬁcial  effect  of  green  tea  consumption  in  Japan.  Nakachi  and
colleague  studied  a  cohort  of  8552  participants  and  observed  a  28%

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

137

reduction  in  death  from  cardiovascular  disease  for  men   and  women
consuming  over  10  cups  a  day  compared  to  those  consuming  less
than  3  cups  per  day  [4].   Similarly,  the  Ohsaki  National  Health  Insur-
ance  Cohort  Study,  which  followed  40,530  Japanese  adults  for  11
years,  demonstrated  a  dose  relationship  between  increasing  green
tea  consumption  and  reduced  total  and  cardiovascular  mortality
that  was  strongest  in  women  with  a  relative  risk  of  0.69  (95%  CI,
0.53–0.90)  for  women  who  consumed  more  than  ﬁve  cups  per  day
[5].  Stroke  mortality  was  particularly  reduced  in  tea  drinkers.  A
case–control  study  from  China  also  suggested  a  favorable  effect  of
green  and  oolong  tea  consumption  against  ischemic  stroke  [6].

Recently,  a  very 

large  prospective  study 

involving  76,979
Japanese  adults  examined  the  relationship  between  cardiovascu-
lar  mortality  and  consumption  of  several  different  types  of  tea.  The
investigators  reported  a  strong  inverse  relationship  between  car-
diovascular  mortality  and  consumption  of  more  than  six  cups  of
green  tea  per  day  [7].   Interestingly,  consumption  of  more  than  one
cup  of  oolong  tea  per  day  was  also  associated  with  reduced  risk
in  Japan  [7].   Overall,  these  studies  conducted  in  Japan  and  China
suggested  that  consumption  of  relatively  large  amounts  of  green
tea  (5–10  cups  per  day)  is  associated  with  reduced  cardiovascular
events.

Studies  performed  in  Europe  and  the  U.S.  suggested  a  beneﬁt
from  consumption  of  black  tea.  For  example,  Sesso  et  al.  completed
a  case–control  study  and  observed  that  individuals  with  history  of
myocardial  infarction  were  less  likely  to  be  consuming  more  than
a  cup  of  black  tea  per  day  compared  to  age,  sex,  and  community-
matched  controls  (odds  ratio  of  0.56)  [8].  In  the  Determinants  of
Myocardial  Infarction  Onset  Study,  individuals  consuming  more
than  an  average  of  two  cups  of  black  tea  per  day  had  lower  total
and  cardiovascular  mortality  during  3.8-year  follow-up  compared
to  individuals  consuming  less  tea  [9].  The  same  study  demonstrated
lower  prevalence  of  ventricular  arrhythmia  during  hospitalization
for  myocardial  infarction  among  tea  drinkers,  possibly  suggesting
less  severe  infarction  and  providing  a  potential  explanation  for  the
reduction  in  cardiovascular  mortality  observed  during  subsequent
follow-up  [10].

A 

large  cohort  of  37,514  participants 

in  Netherlands  was
prospectively  followed  for  13  years  with  end  points  of  cardiovascu-
lar  disease  morbidity  and  mortality  [11].  In  that  study,  consumption
of  tea  (mainly  black  tea)  3–6  cups  daily  was  associated  with  a
reduced  risk  of  cardiovascular  disease  mortality.  There  was  no  asso-
ciation,  however,  between  tea  consumption  and  all  cause  mortality.
In  that  study,  tea  drinking  was  also  found  to  be  associated  with  a
higher  educational  level,  higher  physical  activity,  healthier  diet,  and
lower  prevalence  of  smoking,  hypercholesterolemia  and  diabetes.
Although  the  investigators  adjusted  for  these  factors,  residual  con-
founding  by  health  behavior  could  have  affected  the  results.  A
study  from  a  Norwegian  cohort  (Oppland  County)  of  9856  men   and
10,233  women  showed  a  strong  trend  for  a  beneﬁt  of  tea  [12].  In
that  study,  there  were  signiﬁcant  correlations  between  tea  con-
sumption  and  blood  pressure  and  cholesterol  levels,  which  were
lower  among  individuals  consuming  one  or  more  cups  of  tea  per
day.

Several  epidemiological  studies  failed  to  show  an  association
between  tea  consumption  and  cardiovascular  disease.  For  exam-
ple,  in  the  Scottish  Heart  Health  Study  involving  10,359  men   and
women  there  was  no  association  between  tea  consumption  and
prevalent  coronary  heart  disease  [13].  In  a  cohort  of  1900  Welsh
men,  the  group  with  the  highest  consumption  of  tea  (more  than
eight  cups  per  day)  actually  had  higher  ischemic  heart  disease  mor-
tality  compared  to  the  group  consuming  less  than  two  cups  per
day  [14].  The  authors  pointed  out  that  tea  is  often  consumed  with
milk  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  speculated  that  milk  might  have
affected  absorption  or  increased  fat  intake  and  inﬂuenced  a  beneﬁt
of  tea.

Other  factors  might  explain  the  lack  of  beneﬁt  in  these  studies.
For  example,  it  has  been  noted  that  tea  consumption  is  more  com-
mon   among  individuals  of  low  socioeconomic  status  in  the  U.K.,
and  the  association  between  lower  social  status  and  higher  cardio-
vascular  disease  risk  might  obscure  a  beneﬁcial  effect  of  tea  [15].
Another  consideration  is  the  baseline  ﬂavonoid  intake.  If  the  entire
U.K.  population  has  a  relatively  high  level  of  tea  intake,  then  even
individuals  in  the  lower  range  of  consumption  could  be  receiving
the  maximal  beneﬁts  of  tea.  Conversely,  a  study  in  cohort  with  rel-
atively  low  overall  tea  intake  might  fail  to  show  a  beneﬁt  even  in
the  subgroup  of  individuals  in  the  highest  quartile  or  quintile  of
tea  intake.  In  this  regard,  the  relationship  between  tea  consump-
tion  and  cardiovascular  events  was   only  a  non-signiﬁcant  trend
(P  =  0.07)  in  the  Women’s  Health  Study,  where  only  a  small  propor-
tion  of  the  women   in  the  U.S.  consumed  more  than  four  cups  of  tea
per  day  [16].  Sesso  et  al.  also  observed  no  signiﬁcant  association
between  tea  consumption  and  cardiovascular  disease  in  a  cohort
of  17,228  college  alumni  (College  Alumni  Health  Study)  where  the
median  intake  of  tea  was   relatively  low  (1  cup  per  day)  [17].  This
cohort  also  was   relatively  healthy  and  had  higher  socioeconomic
status  than  some  of  the  other  studies,  which  also  may  have  made  it
difﬁcult  to  show  a  beneﬁt  of  tea  consumption.  Such  factors  might
also  account  for  the  lack  of  beneﬁt  of  tea  consumption  in  a  cohort
of  34,789  male  health  professionals  [18].

Overall,  the  bulk  of  evidence  does  suggest  that  higher  consump-
tion  of  both  green  and  black  tea  is  associated  with  reduction  of
cardiovascular  risk,  despite  the  negative  results  of  some  studies.  A
number  of  meta-analyses  have  been  performed  to  more  formally
address  this  question.  For  example,  Peters  et  al.  examined  the  rela-
tion  of  tea  consumption  to  stroke,  myocardial  infarction,  and  all
coronary  heart  disease  in  an  analysis  of  10  cohort  studies  and  seven
case–control  studies  [19].  The  incidence  of  myocardial  infarction
was   estimated  to  be  11%  lower  for  an  increase  in  tea  consumption
of  3  cups  per  day  (1  cup  =  237  ml).  Those  investigators,  however,
acknowledged  that  their  results  need  to  be  interpreted  with  caution
because  there  was  evidence  of  bias  toward  preferential  publication
of  smaller  positive  studies  [19].  Also,  there  was  heterogeneity  that
could  be  explained  by  the  geographic  region  where  the  studies  were
conducted.  The  same  group  pooled  data  from  nine  studies  involv-
ing  194,965  individuals  and  concluded  that  consumption  of  three
or  more  cups  of  green  or  black  tea  per  day  was   associated  reduced
incidence  of  ischemic  stroke  [20].

In  regard  to  the  speciﬁc  components  of  tea  that  are  responsi-
ble  for  beneﬁt,  several  epidemiological  studies  and  meta-analyses
have  examined  consumption  of  ﬂavonoid-containing  foods  more
generally.  In  addition  to  tea,  such  foods  include  grapes  and  red
wine,  chocolate,  apples,  onions,  and  other  fruits  and  vegetables.  In
the  Zutphen  Elderly  Study,  which  examined  a  cohort  of  805  Dutch
men   with  5-year  follow-up,  dietary  ﬂavonoids  were  inversely  asso-
ciated  with  coronary  heart  disease  mortality  with  relative  risk  of
0.42  for  individuals  in  the  highest  versus  lowest  tertile  of  ﬂavonoid
intake  [21].  A  similar  relationship  was  observed  after  10-year
follow-up  that  remained  highly  signiﬁcant  after  adjustment  for  car-
diovascular  risk  factors  [22].  Flavonoid  intake  also  was  inversely
related  to  stroke  in  the  same  cohort  [23].  In  the  Seven  Countries
Study  with  25  years  of  follow-up,  there  was  an  inverse  correlation
between  ﬂavonoid  intake  and  incidence  of  coronary  heart  disease
[24].  In  a  Finnish  cohort  of  25,372  male  smokers,  ﬂavonol  and
ﬂavone  intake  was  inversely  associated  with  myocardial  infarction
and  there  also  was   a  trend  for  reduced  coronary  heart  disease  death
[25].

In  contrast,  there  was   no  signiﬁcant  correlation  between
ﬂavonoid  intake  and  cardiovascular  disease  events  in  a  cohort
of  U.S.  women  participating  in  the  Women’s  Health  Study  [16],
but  as  previously  noted,  overall  ﬂavonoid  intake  in  this  cohort
was   relatively  low.  Overall,  available  evidence,  including  several

138

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

meta-analyses  suggests  a  beneﬁt  of  ﬂavonoid  consumption  against
cardiovascular  disease  [26,27].

3.  Tea  and  risk  factors  for  cardiovascular  disease

Given  the  apparent  association  between  tea  consumption  and
cardiovascular  disease  events,  it  is  worthwhile  to  consider  the
potential  mechanisms  of  beneﬁt.  One  important  potential  mecha-
nism  is  an  effect  of  tea  on  cardiovascular  disease  risk  factors.  A  large
number  of  epidemiological  and  intervention  studies  have  exam-
ined  this  issue.  Despite  this  large  body  of  work,  it  remains  unclear
whether  tea  consumption  has  favorable  effects  on  blood  pressure,
serum  lipids,  diabetes  mellitus,  or  obesity  in  human  subjects.  If
present,  the  beneﬁcial  effects  of  tea  on  risk  factors  are  likely  to  be
modest.

3.1.  Hypertension

Epidemiological  and  intervention  studies  provide  evidence  that
consumption  of  tea  and  other  polyphenol-containing  foods  lower
blood  pressure.  In  a  large  epidemiological  study  involving  over
20,000  Norwegian  participants,  systolic  blood  pressure  was   2.1  and
3.5  mmHg   lower  in  men   and  women,  respectively,  who   consumed
ﬁve  or  more  cups  of  tea  per  day  [12].  In  a  study  of  218  elderly
women,  tea  consumption  and  urine  4-O-methylgallic  acid  (a  mea-
sure  of  polyphenol  consumption)  correlated  inversely  with  systolic
and  diastolic  blood  pressure,  with  a  2.2  mmHg   lower  systolic  blood
pressure  for  each  cup  of  tea  consumed  [28].  While  these  absolute
changes  in  blood  pressure  may   seem  small,  changes  of  this  magni-
tude  on  a  population  basis  would  result  in  the  prevention  of  many
cardiovascular  events  and  strokes  [29].  Yang  et  al.  examined  inci-
dent  hypertension  in  a  cohort  of  1507  men   and  women   in  Taiwan
and  observed  a  reduction  in  the  risk  of  developing  new  hyperten-
sion  in  individuals  consuming  more  than  120  ml   of  green  or  oolong
tea  per  day  after  adjusting  for  other  risk  factors,  lifestyle,  sodium
intake,  and  coffee  consumption  [30].  On  the  other  hand  several  very
large  studies  have  shown  no  relation  between  tea  consumption  and
blood  pressure  [31–33].

Intervention  studies  provide  additional  information  about  the
effects  of  tea  consumption  on  blood  pressure.  This  question  is  com-
plicated  because,  in  addition  to  ﬂavonoids,  tea  contains  caffeine,
which  causes  a  short-term  increase  in  blood  pressure.  Hodgson
observed  an  increase  in  blood  pressure  30  min   after  ingestion  of
green  or  black  tea  in  normotensive  men   that  was  no  longer  evident
at  60  min   after  [34].  Interestingly,  this  increase  in  blood  pressure
was  actually  greater  than  the  effect  of  an  equivalent  dose  of  caf-
feine  alone  suggesting  that  tea  or  tea  polyphenols  might  cause  acute
increases  blood  pressure.  Consumption  of  either  form  of  tea  for  7
days  had  no  effect  on  24-h  ambulatory  blood  pressure  in  the  same
population  [34].  The  same  group  of  investigators  observed  that  the
acute  hypertensive  effect  of  tea  consumption  was  blunted  when
tea  was  consumed  with  food  [35].

Nagao  et  al.  completed  a  study  of  green  tea  extract  (583  mg
of  catechin)  in  Japanese  men   and  women  with  abdominal  obesity
[36].  In  the  subgroup  of  participants  with  baseline  systolic  blood
pressure  of  130  mmHg   or  higher,  tea  extract  signiﬁcantly  reduced
blood  pressure  compared  to  placebo  [36].  Brown  et  al.  examined  the
effects  of  EGCG  on  blood  pressure  and  other  metabolic  risk  factors
in  overweight  or  obese  men   and  observed  a  2.7  mmHg   reduction  in
diastolic  blood  pressure  [37].  More  recently,  Nantz  et  al.  completed
a  double-blind  trial  in  111  healthy  volunteers  comparing  the  effects
of  a  standardized  capsule  containing  200  mg   of  decaffeinated  cat-
echin  green  tea  extract  to  placebo  [38].  They  observed  a  5  mmHg
decrease  in  systolic  blood  pressure  that  was  signiﬁcantly  different
from  the  effect  of  placebo.

The  apparently  favorable  effects  of  tea  and  tea  components  on
blood  pressure  in  intervention  studies  contrast  with  the  results  of
a  large  number  of  other  clinical  studies  examining  the  effects  of  tea
on  a  variety  of  physiological  endpoints.  Taubert  et  al.  recently  com-
pleted  a  meta-analysis  pooling  ﬁve  parallel  group  and  cross-over
studies  that  reported  on  the  effects  of  tea  on  blood  pressure  in  a
total  of  343  participants  with  a  median  duration  of  4  weeks  [39].
The  meta-analysis  revealed  no  signiﬁcant  effect  of  tea  consump-
tion  on  blood  pressure.  Interestingly,  they  did  observe  a  favorable
effect  of  chocolate  consumption  on  blood  pressure  using  the  same
approach.

Overall,  the  available  studies  do  not  provide  a  deﬁnitive  answer
to  the  question  of  whether  tea  consumption  lowers  blood  pres-
sure.  Many  of  the  studies  examined  normotensive  populations  and
populations  already  well  controlled  on  anti-hypertensive  therapy,
where  it  is  difﬁcult  to  demonstrate  a  blood  pressure  lowering  effect
with  any  intervention.  Furthermore,  few  of  the  studies  used  24-
ambulatory  blood  pressure  monitoring  or  treated  subjects  for  an
extended  period  of  time.  Any  beneﬁt  of  tea  ﬂavonoids  must  over-
come  the  short-term  blood  pressure  raising  effects  of  caffeine.  Thus,
despite  the  large  number  of  prior  epidemiological  and  interven-
tional  studies,  further  deﬁnitive  studies  are  needed  to  determine
the  acute  and  chronic  effects  of  tea  consumption  on  blood  pressure
in  patients  with  hypertension  and  whether  blood  pressure  effects
could  explain  the  observed  associations  between  tea  consumption
and  reduced  cardiovascular  risk.

3.2.  Dyslipidemia

Improvement  in  serum  lipid  proﬁle  is  another  possible  mech-
anism  that  would  account 
for  a  beneﬁcial  effect  of  tea  on
cardiovascular  disease,  and  several  observational  studies  suggest
that  tea  might  have  such  an  effect.  Kono  et  al.  reported  that  total
serum  cholesterol  was  8  mg/dl  lower  in  1306  Japanese  men   con-
suming  nine  or  more  cups  of  green  tea  per  day  [40].  Stensvold
reported  a  comparable  reduction  in  total  cholesterol  in  Norwegian
men   and  women   consuming  more  than  ﬁve  cups  of  black  tea  per
day  [12].  On  the  other  hand,  several  observational  studies  have
shown  no  relationship  between  green  or  black  tea  consumption
and  total  or  LDL  cholesterol  levels  [41,42].

The  question  of  a  lipid-lowering  effect  of  tea  has  also  been  exam-
ined  in  randomized  intervention  studies  that  allow  for  control  of
potential  confounding  variables.  Davies  et  al.  completed  a  placebo
controlled,  double  blind  crossover  study  of  ﬁve  cups  of  black  tea
and  placebo  beverage  in  15  mildly  hypercholesterolemic  adults  and
observed  a  reductions  of  6.5%  and  11.1%  in  total  and  LDL  choles-
terol,  respectively  [43].  In  a  much  larger  (n  =  240)  and  well-designed
randomized  crossover  study,  Maron  et  al.  observed  comparable
reductions  in  LDL  cholesterol  with  consumption  of  ﬂavin-enriched
green  tea  for  12  weeks  [44].  Several  other  intervention  studies
have  shown  cholesterol  lowering  effects  of  green  and  black  tea  as
well  as  tea  extracts  [38,45–48].   Other  studies  have  failed  to  show
such  an  effect  [37,49–51].   Interestingly,  there  is  evidence  that  tea
consumption  may   have  a  favorable  effect  on  post-prandial  lipids,
which  are  particularly  atherogenic  [45]  and  a  favorable  effect  on
HDL  cholesterol  in  patients  with  diabetes  mellitus  [52].

Overall,  the  published  studies  examined  many  different  patient
populations  with  varying  degree  of  baseline  dyslipidemia  and
background  therapy.  The  available  studies  also  examined  many  dif-
ferent  preparations  and  extracts  of  tea.  This  heterogeneity  in  study
design  likely  explains  the  divergent  results.  In  an  extensive  meta-
analysis  involving  133  interventions  studies  examining  the  effects
of  various  ﬂavonoid-containing  foods,  Hooper  et  al.  concluded  that
green  tea  consumption  has  a  signiﬁcant  albeit  modest  LDL  lowering
effect  [53].

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

139

3.2.1.  Diabetes  and  obesity

Type  2  diabetes  mellitus  is  a  major  cardiovascular  disease  risk
factor  and  is  increasing  in  prevalence,  in  large  part  due  to  the
ongoing  obesity  epidemic  [54].  Insulin  resistance  is  the  primary
pathophysiological  mechanism  in  type  2  diabetes  mellitus,  and
there  is  experimental  evidence  that  polyphenols  found  in  tea  can
improve  insulin  sensitivity.  Observational  and  intervention  stud-
ies  suggest  that  this  mechanism  may   be  operative  in  humans.  In
a  study  of  17,413  Japanese  adults,  Iso  et  al.  reported  that  the  inci-
dence  of  new  diabetes  was  inversely  associated  with  consumption
of  more  than  six  cups  of  green  tea  per  day,  while  there  was   no
association  with  black  or  oolong  tea  [55].  Interestingly,  there  also
was  an  inverse  association  between  diabetes  mellitus  and  coffee
consumption  in  that  study.  Greenberg  et  al.  observed  that  con-
sumption  of  two  cups  of  “regular  tea”  (presumably  black  tea)  per
day  was  associated  with  a  reduction  in  the  incidence  of  diabetes
during  an  8.4  year  follow-up  period  in  participants  of  the  National
Health  and  Nutrition  Examination  Survey  (NHANES)  who   were  age
60  or  younger  [56].  On  further  subgroup  analysis,  this  relationship
applied  to  the  individuals  who  had  lost  weight  during  the  follow-up
period.  The  Whitehall  II  study  also  showed  decreased  incidence  of
diabetes  mellitus  in  5823  participants  followed  for  11.7  years  that
was  not  signiﬁcant  after  adjustment  for  concomitant  risk  factors
[57].  Finally,  in  the  Women’s  Health  Study,  Song  et  al.  observed
a  borderline  relationship  between  tea  consumption  (≥4  cups  per
day)  and  the  incidence  of  new  diabetes  mellitus  over  an  8  year
follow-up  period  with  a  relative  risk  of  0.72  (95%  CI  0.52–1.01)
[58].

In  contrast,  several  very  large  studies  showed  no  relation-
ship.  For  example,  in  reports  from  the  Nurses  Health  Study  and
Health  Professionals’  Follow-up  Study,  there  was   no  signiﬁcant
relation  between  tea  consumption,  although  interestingly  there
was  a  relationship  with  coffee  consumption  [59,60].  There  also
was  no  relation  between  tea  consumption  and  diabetes  in  a  large
cohort  of  46,906  African  American  Women   [61].  Despite  these  neg-
ative  studies,  Huxley  et  al.  completed  a  meta-analysis  examining
the  effects  of  caffeinated  beverages  on  incident  diabetes  combin-
ing  data  from  18  studies  with  information  from  nearly  half  a  million
individuals  [62].  In  regard  to  tea,  they  found  that  the  overall  rela-
tive  risk  of  new  diabetes  was  signiﬁcantly  reduced  (RR  0.84,  95%  CI
0.73–0.94).

As  for  the  other  risk  factors  discussed  above,  clinical  interven-
tion  studies  examining  the  effects  of  tea  and  tea  polyphenols  on
endpoints  related  to  diabetes  provide  additional  insight  into  the
question  of  whether  tea  might  affect  diabetes  mellitus.  Hosoda  et  al.
observed  that  consumption  of  oolong  tea  (1500  ml/day)  for  30  days
in  a  placebo  controlled  crossover  study  lowered  fasting  glucose  in
20  patients  with  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  on  hypoglycemic  drugs
[63].  Consumption  of  1  g  of  black  tea  by  healthy  volunteers  lowered
the  blood  glucose  and  blood  insulin  responses  to  an  oral  glucose
load  (glucose  tolerance  test)  suggesting  an  improvement  in  insulin
sensitivity  [64].

In  contrast,  Fukino  et  al.  completed  a  placebo  controlled  study
examining  the  effects  of  green  tea  (administered  as  a  extract  pow-
der  containing  544  mg   polyphenols  mixed  with  hot  water)  in  a
group  of  66  patients  with  diabetes  mellitus  or  borderline  diabetes
[65].  Compared  to  the  effects  of  placebo,  there  were  no  effects  of
green  tea  on  measures  of  glycemic  status,  including  blood  glucose,
insulin,  hemoglobin  A1C,  or  the  homeostasis  model  assessment  of
insulin  resistance  (HOMA-IR).  Interpretation  of  this  study  is  com-
plicated  by  a  relatively  similar  intake  of  polyphenols  in  the  active
(747  mg/d)  and  placebo  (469  mg/d)  groups  and  the  observation  that
these  glycemic  variables  improved  in  both  groups.  It  is  possible  that
an  effect  of  green  tea  would  have  been  detected  if  polyphenol  intake
had  been  limited  in  the  placebo  group,  as  is  often  done  in  studies
of  this  type.  Ryu  and  colleagues  also  observed  no  effect  of  green  tea

consumption  compared  to  water  in  a  crossover  for  4  weeks  in  55
patients  with  type  2  diabetes  mellitus.

Interestingly,  there  have  been  studies  showing  an  effect  of  tea
consumption  on  body  weight.  For  example,  Chantre  and  Lairon
administered  green  tea  extract  to  moderately  obese  subjects  for  3
months  observed  a  4.6%  decrease  in  body  weight  and  4.5%  decrease
in  waist  circumference  by  4.48%  [66].  In  a  study  of  38  healthy
Japanese  men   with  normal  body  mass  index  randomized  to  con-
sume  green  tea  or  a  low  catechin  control,  Nagao  et  al.  reported
that  green  tea  consumption  produced  a  2.4  kg  decrease  in  body
weight  and  favorable  effects  on  waist  circumference,  body  fat
mass,  skin-fold  thickness,  and  total  subcutaneous  fat  areas  (tested
by  computed  tomography)  [67].  The  same  group  subsequently
completed  a  larger  randomized,  placebo-controlled  study  in  240
Japanese  men   and  women   and  observed  a  1.7  kg  decrease  in  body
weight  and  signiﬁcant  changes  in  body  fat  and  fat  distribution  with
consumption  of  green  tea  extract  [36].  Recently,  Basu  et  al.  showed
a  decrease  in  body  weight  following  8  weeks  of  green  tea  or  green
tea  extract  compared  to  placebo  in  a  group  of  35  obese  individu-
als  with  the  metabolic  syndrome  [49].  The  mechanisms  accounting
for  weight  loss  with  tea  or  tea  components  remain  unclear.  It  has
been  suggested  that  they  may   increase  sympathetic  nervous  sys-
tem  activity  and  stimulate  thermogenesis,  which  would  increase
calorie  consumption  [68].

As  for  other  risk  factors,  the  available  studies  provide  incon-
sistent  ﬁndings.  Some  studies  showed  weight  loss  and  reduction
of  diabetes,  while  others  did  not.  Differences  in  study  population
and  tea  preparation  likely  explain  these  inconsistencies.  Overall,
the  available  evidence,  including  a  large  meta-analysis,  suggests
that  tea  consumption  reduces  the  incidence  of  new  diabetes  mel-
litus.  There  is  a  modest  level  of  evidence  supporting  a  favorable
effect  of  tea  components  on  insulin  sensitivity.  Finally,  tea  con-
sumption  appears  to  induce  a  modest  amount  of  weight  loss.  These
conclusions  must  be  tempered  by  the  possibility  of  publication  bias
and  the  relatively  small  size  of  most  of  the  published  intervention
studies.

4.  Mechanistic  studies  with  tea  and  cardiovascular  diseases

Experimental  and  translational  clinical  studies  have  provided
further  insight  into  the  mechanisms  of  beneﬁt  for  tea  against  car-
diovascular  disease  and  Table  1  contains  a  partial  list  of  such
mechanisms.  These  include  antioxidant  effects,  anti-inﬂammatory
effects,  and  improvement  of  endothelial  function.  This  section  will
review  these  possible  mechanisms.

4.1.  Antioxidant  effects  of  tea  and  tea  components

According  to  the  oxidative  hypothesis  of  atherosclerosis,  LDL
oxidation  is  a  key  step  in  the  atherogenic  process  [69].  Based  this
hypothesis,  considerable  effort  was  made  to  determine  whether
antioxidant  compounds  that  inhibit  LDL  oxidation  might  prevent
cardiovascular  disease  in  humans  [70].  A  large  number  of  studies,

Table  1
Potential  mechanisms  of  beneﬁt  for  tea  against  cardiovascular  disease.

Blood  pressure  lowering
Improved  dyslipidemia
Improved  insulin  sensitivity
Weight  loss
Antioxidant  effects  –  scavenging  reactive  oxygen  species  and
preventing  oxidation  of  lipids,  proteins,  and  DNA
Anti-inﬂammatory  effects
Improved  endothelial  function
Platelet  inhibition
Inhibition  of  smooth  muscle  cell  proliferation  and  migration

140

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

including  large  clinical  trials  were  conducted,  and  overall  there
remains  little  evidence  that  antioxidant  supplements,  including
vitamins  E  and  C  and  beta  carotene,  reduce  cardiovascular  disease.
While  it  is  clear  that  atherosclerosis  is  associated  with  increased
oxidative  stress,  it  is  now  understood  that  reactive  oxygen  species
play  important  signaling  roles  in  the  vasculature  and  that  sim-
ply  scavenging  reactive  oxygen  species  or  inhibiting  LDL  oxidation
is  not  an  effective  strategy  to  inhibit  atherosclerosis  [71].  In  this
context,  it  is  known  that  tea  polyphenols  have  antioxidant  effects
in  vitro  [72–75]  and  many  studies  sought  evidence  for  antioxidant
effects  of  tea  in  humans.

In  regard  to  in  vitro  effects,  tea  and  tea  extracts  have  been  shown
to  scavenge  superoxide  and  other  reactive  oxygen  species  [76].  Tea
and  tea  components  have  also  been  shown  inhibit  lipid  peroxida-
tion  [75,77–80].   Furthermore,  exposure  of  isolated  endothelial  cells
to  tea  limits  their  ability  to  oxidize  LDL  [81].  Tea  ﬂavonoids  can
chelate  redox  active  metal  ions,  which  limits  production  of  reac-
tive  oxygen  species  via  the  Fenton  reaction  [82].  There  is  animal
evidence  for  antioxidant  effects  of  tea  following  oral  administra-
tion  [83–85].   Consistent  with  the  more  recent  human  data,  green
and  black  tea  inhibited  LDL  oxidation  following  oral  administra-
tion  to  hypercholesterolemic  rabbits,  but  the  effect  did  not  relate
to  changes  in  extent  of  atherosclerosis  [84].

As  mentioned,  studies  show  that  tea  inﬂuences  plasma  antiox-
idant  status  in  humans.  For  example,  several  studies  have  shown
that  tea  consumption  increases  the  ability  of  plasma  to  scavenge
reactive  oxygen  species  [46,86,87].   Studies  have  also  shown  that
LDL  isolated  from  plasma  is  less  susceptible  to  oxidation  follow-
ing  tea  consumption  [88],  while  other  studies  have  failed  to  show
such  an  effect  [51,75,87,89,90].  In  regard  to  preventing  oxidation
of  lipids,  proteins,  or  DNA  in  vivo,  the  evidence  for  beneﬁcial  effects
of  tea  is  less  clear.  Hakim  et  al.  reported  that  consumption  of  green
tea,  but  not  black  tea,  by  cigarette  smokers  decreased  urinary  lev-
els  of  8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine,  a  marker  of  DNA  oxidation  [91].
Klaunig  et  al.  reported  a  similar  ﬁnding  [92].  Erba  et  al.  reported  a
reduction  of  DNA  oxidative  damage  in  lymphocytes  isolated  from
healthy  volunteers  [46].  Other  studies  failed  to  show  evidence  that
consumption  of  tea  inhibits  markers  of  lipid  or  DNA  oxidation  in
human  subjects  [90,93,94].

As  was  observed  in  intervention  studies  examining  the  effects
of  tea  consumption  on  risk  factors,  the  data  are  mixed  regarding
antioxidant  effects  of  tea  consumption.  Some  of  the  discrepant
results  may   reﬂect  differences  in  tea  preparations  and  the  stud-
ied  populations.  Overall,  there  are  reasonably  convincing  studies  to
indicate  that  consumption  of  tea  or  tea  components  can  inﬂuence
antioxidant  capacity  plasma.  However,  the  bulk  of  the  evidence
does  not  support  an  in  vivo  antioxidant  effect  following  consump-
tion  of  relevant  amounts  of  tea.

4.2.  Anti-inﬂammatory  effects

Inﬂammation  is  now  known  to  be  an  integral  part  of  atheroscle-
rosis  and  is  involved  from  the  earliest  stages  of  atherogenesis  to
later  stages  of  plaque  vulnerability  and  rupture,  which  causes  clin-
ical  events  such  as  myocardial  infarction  and  stroke  [95].  There  is
strong  evidence  in  experimental  models  and  in  animals  for  anti-
inﬂammatory  effects  of  tea  and  tea  components.  In  vitro  studies
have  shown  favorable  effects  on  inﬂammatory  cells.  For  example,
EGCG  inhibits  migration  of  neutrophils  through  an  endothelial  cell
monolayer  [96],  decreases  the  activity  of  neutrophil  elastase  [97],
and  reduces  ROS  production  and  chemokine-induced  chemotaxis
of  neutrophils  [98,99].  EGCG  also  inhibits  adhesion  and  migra-
tion  of  CD8+  T  cells  [100].  EGCG  and  other  catechins  have  been
shown  to  inhibit  cytokine-induced  adhesion  molecule  expression
and  monocyte  adhesion  in  cultured  endothelial  cells  [101].  EGCG
blocked  lipopolysaccharide-induced  tumor  necrosis  factor  alpha

(TNF-alpha)  production  and  lethality  in  mice  [102]  and  had  reduced
inﬂammatory  activation  in  the  lung  in  a  mouse  model  of  pulmonary
ﬁbrosis  [103].

In  humans,  epidemiological  and 

intervention  studies  have
examined  anti-inﬂammatory  effects  of  tea  consumption.  Serum
levels  of  C-reactive  protein  and  other  markers  of  inﬂammation
relate  strongly  to  cardiovascular  risk,  and  several  epidemiolog-
ical  studies  examined  the  effects  of  tea  consumption  on  such
markers.  For  example,  tea  consumption  was  inversely  related  to  C-
reactive  protein  levels  in  a  cohort  of  1031  health  men   [104].  Other
studies  failed  to  show  such  a  relationship  [58,105,106].  More  gener-
ally,  ﬂavonoid  consumption  and  fruit  and  vegetable  consumption
are  associated  with  lower  levels  of  C-reactive  protein  [107,108],
making  it  harder  to  conﬁrm  a  speciﬁc  relationship  with  tea  con-
sumption.

In  regard  to  intervention  studies,  Neyestani  et  al.  reported  a
decrease  in  C-reactive  protein  following  consumption  of  black  tea
extract  for  4  weeks  in  46  patients  with  type  2  diabetes  melli-
tus  [109].  Steptoe  et  al.  also  reported  a  decrease  in  C-reactive
protein  and  pro-inﬂammatory  monocyte-platelet  aggregates  fol-
lowing  4  weeks  of  black  tea  consumption  in  healthy  men   [110].
Green  tea  consumption  reduced  C-reactive  protein  levels  in  male
smokers  [111].  Other  well-done  studies,  however,  showed  no  such
effects  in  patients  with  risk  factors  or  coronary  artery  disease
[65,90,112,113].

As  has  been  observed  for  other  tea  intervention  studies,  the
discrepant  results  are  likely  attributable  to  differences  in  tea  prepa-
rations  and  patient  characteristics.  No  formal  meta-analysis  has
examined  the  effects  of  tea  consumption  on  C-reactive  protein  or
other  markers  of  inﬂammation.  However,  the  bulk  of  the  evidence
does  not  suggest  a  strong  anti-inﬂammatory  effect  of  tea  consump-
tion,  despite  promising  experimental  studies.

4.3.  Endothelial  function

The  endothelium  is  a  major  regulator  of  vascular  homeosta-
sis  and  controls  arterial  tone,  thrombosis,  the  composition  of  the
arterial  wall,  and  local  inﬂammation  by  production  of  a  variety
of  factors,  including  nitric  oxide  nitric  oxide  [114].  Abnormali-
ties  of  endothelial  function  relate  to  cardiovascular  risk  factors,
predict  cardiovascular  events,  and  respond  to  risk  reduction  ther-
apies,  including  drugs,  lifestyle  changes,  and  dietary  interventions.
Recently,  there  have  been  several  studies  showing  beneﬁcial  effects
of  tea  on  endothelial  function,  particularly  endothelium-dependent
vasodilation.

In  a  placebo-controlled  crossover  study,  Duffy  et  al.  showed  that
consumption  of  black  tea  (900  ml   per  day  for  4  weeks)  improved
endothelium-dependent  ﬂow-mediated  dilation  of  the  brachial
artery  in  patients  with  coronary  artery  disease  [115].  Hodgson  et
al.  showed  a  similar  beneﬁt  of  black  tea  consumption  in  patients
with  mildly  elevated  cholesterol  levels  [116].  Green  tea  has  also
been  reported  to  improve  brachial  artery  ﬂow-mediated  dila-
tion  [117,118]  and  circulating  endothelial  progenitor  cells,  which
contribute  to  maintenance  of  vascular  health  [118].  One  study
suggested  that  green  and  black  tea  have  equivalent  effects  on
ﬂow-mediated  dilation  in  post-menopausal  women   [119].   Favor-
able  effects  on  endothelial  function  have  been  reported  with  tea
components,  including  EGCG  [120].  In  addition  to  improving  FMD,
green  tea  improves  endothelium-dependent  dilation  of  forearm
microvessels  in  response  to  acetylcholine  infusion  in  cigarette
smokers  and  this  improvement  was  associated  with  an  increase
in  plasma  nitric  oxide  [111].  On  the  other  hand,  tea  consumption
had  no  effect  on  carotid-femoral  pulse  wave  velocity,  a  measure  of
arterial  stiffness  that  depends  in  part  on  endothelial  function  [121].
light  on  the  mechanisms
accounting  for  improved  nitric  oxide  bioavailability  following

Experimental  studies  have  shed 

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

141

tea  consumption.  Initially 
investigators  hypothesized  that  tea
ﬂavonoids  might  scavenge  reactive  oxygen  species  and  prevent
“inactivation”  of  nitric  oxide,  but  as  discussed  above,  there  is
little  evidence  that  the  plasma  concentrations  of  tea  ﬂavonoids
achieved  following  tea  consumption  are  high  enough  to  act  via
this  mechanism.  More  recent  studies  indicate  that  tea  extracts
and  individual  tea  polyphenols,  including  EGCG  stimulate  phos-
phorylation  of  endothelial  nitric  oxide  synthase  (eNOS)  at  serine
1177,  a  response  that  increases  production  of  nitric  oxide.  The
response  occur  via  activation  of  the  phosphatidylinositol  3-kinase
(PI3  kinase)/Akt  signaling  pathway  [122–124].  Subsequent  studies
suggest  that  this  process  also  involves  activation  of  p38  MAP   kinase
and  transactivation  of  estrogen  receptor  alpha  [125].

A  number  of  other  mechanisms  contribute  to  the  observed
increase  in  eNOS  activity  following  exposure  of  endothelial  cells  to
tea  components.  For  example,  green  tea  polyphenols  down  regu-
late  expression  of  caveolin-1  (Cav-1),  an  negative  regulator  of  eNOS
activity  and  this  effect  also  involves  activation  of  p38  MAP   kinase
[126].  Other  polyphenol  mixtures  have  been  shown  to  activate
AMP-kinase,  a  key  regulator  of  cellular  energy  status,  which  also
leads  to  activation  of  PI3K/Akt  and  eNOS  phosphorylation  [127].

Overall,  there  is  a  large  body  of  work  showing  that  tea  consump-
tion  improves  endothelium-dependent  vasodilation  in  healthy
human  subjects  and  in  patients  with  risk  factors  and  established
atherosclerosis.  The  effects  are  particularly  strong  following  acute
consumption  of  tea  and  occur  despite  acute  effects  of  caffeinated
tea  to  increase  blood  pressure.  Many  studies  also  show  sustained
improvements  in  endothelial  function  with  longer-term  tea  con-
sumption,  while  puriﬁed  EGCG  has  an  acute,  but  no  chronic  effect
[120].  Experimental  studies  provide  strong  evidence  that  tea  acts
via  speciﬁc  signaling  pathways  in  endothelial  cells  that  are  rel-
evant  to  the  pathogenesis  of  atherosclerosis.  Given  the  strong
links  between  endothelial  dysfunction  and  the  pathogenesis  of
atherosclerosis,  a  favorable  effect  of  tea  on  the  endothelium  is  a
plausible  mechanism  that  might  account  for  reduced  cardiovascu-
lar  risk  among  individuals  with  higher  tea  consumption.

4.4.  Anti-platelet  effects

It  is  well  established  that  clinical  coronary  syndromes  such  as
unstable  angina  and  acute  myocardial  infarction  involve  platelet
activation  and  that  anti-platelet  agents  such  as  aspirin  and  clopi-
dogrel  reduce  cardiovascular  risk  [95].  A  number  of  experimental
studies  suggest  that  tea  has  anti-platelet  effects  that  might  reduce
cardiovascular  risk.  For  example,  Kang  et  al.  reported  that  admin-
istration  of  EGCG  or  green  tea  extract  to  mice  prolongs  bleeding
time,  and  prevents  collagen-induced  pulmonary  thrombosis  and
death  [128].  They  also  observed  that  EGCG 
inhibits  agonist-
induced  aggregation  of  human  platelets  in  vitro.  The  effects  may
be  attributed  to  alterations  in  intracellular  calcium  signaling  [129]
and  prostaglandin  metabolism  [130].  Theaﬂavins  in  black  tea  and
green  tea  catechins  have  been  shown  to  be  potent  inhibitors  of
platelet  activating  factor  biosynthesis  and  platelet  aggregation  in  a
rabbit  model  [131].  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  concentrations
of  EGCG  and  other  tea  components  used  in  some  of  these  in  vitro
␮M),   greatly  exceed  the  concentrations  measur-
studies  (50–100 
able  in  plasma  following  consumption  of  tea  or  EGCG  supplement
in  humans  [90,120].

In  regard  to  human  studies,  Hodgson  et  al.  observed  that  tea
consumption  by  healthy  volunteers  reduced  plasma  levels  of  P-
selectin,  a  marker  of  in  vivo  platelet  aggregation,  but  ex  vivo  platelet
aggregation  was  unaffected  in  that  study  [132].  Green  tea  consump-
tion  also  lowered  P-selectin  levels  in  male  smokers  [112].  Steptoe
et  al.  observed  that  black  tea  consumption  for  4  weeks  reduced
platelet-leukocyte  aggregates,  an  important  measure  of  platelet
activation  that  is  relevant  to  coronary  plaque  rupture  [110].  Duffy

et  al.  also  observed  no  effect  of  tea  consumption  on  ex  vivo  platelet
aggregation  following  consumption  of  black  tea  in  patients  with
coronary  artery  disease  [133],  although  that  study  may  be  limited
by  the  background  aspirin  treatment  in  all  of  the  study  subjects.

In  general,  studies  that  examined  ex  vivo  platelet  aggregation
failed  to  show  beneﬁcial  effects,  but  measures  of  in  vivo  platelet
activation  appear  to  be  improved  following  tea  consumption.
Experimental  studies  provide  evidence  of  plausible  mechanisms.
Thus,  the  bulk  of  the  available  data  support  the  hypothesis  that
platelet  inhibitory  effects  might  explain  the  observed  relations
between  tea  consumption  and  reduced  cardiovascular  risk.

4.5.  Anti-proliferative  effects

Another  mechanism  that  might  affect  cardiovascular  disease  is
the  observed  anti-proliferative  and  anti-migratory  effects  of  tea
components  on  vascular  smooth  muscle  cells.  EGCG  arrests  vas-
cular  smooth  muscle  cell  proliferation  in  the  G1  phase  of  the  cell
cycle  and  decreases  the  proliferative  response  following  arterial
injury  in  apolipoprotein  E-null  mice,  a  dyslipidemic  model  that  is
prone  to  develop  atherosclerosis  [134].  EGCG  also  inhibits  vascular
smooth  muscle  cell  activation  and  proliferation  by  platelet-derived
growth  factor  [135].  EGCG  inhibits  vascular  smooth  muscle  cell
migration  through  a  reconstituted  basement  membrane  barrier  in
an  in  vitro  model  that  is  relevant  to  atherogenesis  [136].  Although
there  currently  is  no  human  evidence  of  such  an  effect,  the  anti-
proliferative  properties  of  EGCG  have  prompted  investigators  to
consider  developing  EGCG-eluting  polymeric  stents  for  prevent  of
restenosis  following  angioplasty,  a  process  that  is  primarily  driven
by  vascular  smooth  muscle  cell  proliferation  and  migration  [137].

5.  Clinical  implications

The  reviewed  epidemiological  studies  and  meta-analyses  sug-
gest  that  tea  has  protective  effects  against  cardiovascular  disease.
In  regard  to  the  mechanisms  that  might  account  for  such  effects,
there  is  evidence  that  tea  might  lower  blood  pressure  and  have
favorable  effects  on  blood  lipids,  glucose,  and  body  weight.  In  addi-
tion,  experimental  studies  and  human  intervention  studies  suggest
that  tea  may   have  anti-inﬂammatory,  anti-thrombotic,  and  anti-
proliferative  effects,  and  may   improve  the  function  of  the  vascular
endothelium.  Although  tea  polyphenols  can  scavenge  reactive  oxy-
gen  species  and  protect  LDL  against  oxidation  in  vitro,  human
studies  argue  against  an  important  in  vivo  anti-oxidant  effect  of  tea.
While  the  effects  are  modest  compared  to  the  effects  of  pharma-
cological  interventions,  in  the  opinion  of  the  authors,  the  overall
evidence  suggests  that  tea  consumption  reduces  cardiovascular
risk  by  plausible  mechanisms.  The  case  for  tea  is  strengthened  by  a
similar  body  of  work  for  protective  effects  of  other  polyphenol-
containing  foods  and  beverages  such  as  grapes  and  red  wine,
cocoa,  berries,  and  other  fruits  and  vegetables  [21,53,138–140].  The
question  is  whether  these  ﬁndings  translate  to  speciﬁc  dietary  rec-
ommendations  for  the  general  population  and  for  patients  with
cardiovascular  disease.

Making  speciﬁc  dietary  recommendations  about  tea  consump-
tion  as  an  approach  to  prevent  or  treat  cardiovascular  disease  is
problematic  for  several  reasons.  Importantly,  there  are  no  random-
ized  clinical  outcome  trials  with  tea.  Epidemiological  studies  of
tea  are  unavoidably  confounded  by  the  lifestyles  of  tea  drinkers
and  non-tea  drinkers,  background  tea  intake  of  the  population,  and
many  other  factors.  Most  of  the  current  management  guidelines  in
the  ﬁeld  of  cardiovascular  disease,  particularly  recommendations
about  drug  treatment,  are  based  on  randomized  clinical  trials  and
meta-analyses  of  clinical  trials  that  can  control  for  such  factors.
There  have  been  randomized  studies  of  dietary  approaches  such

142

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

Table  2
Intervention  studies  of  tea  on  blood  pressure  and  lipids  since  the  FDA  decision  in  2006.

First  author  [reference] 

Endpoint 

Study  design 

Nagao  et  al.  [36] 

Body  fat,  LDL,  blood  pressure 

Bertigaglia  et  al.  [48] 

LDL,  HDL,  triglycerides 

Fujita  and  Yamagami  [47] 

LDL,  triglycerides,  body  weight 

Brown  et  al.  [37] 

Nantz   et  al.  [38]

Basu   et  al.  [49] 

Trautwein  et  al.  [50] 

Blood  pressure,  LDL,  HDL, 

Blood  pressure,  LDL

Blood  pressure,  LDL,  body
weight
Serum  lipids 

Hooper  et  al.  [53]

LDL 

Green  tea  extract,  randomized  parallel  group,
12  weeks,  n  =  240
Green  tea,  randomized  parallel  group,  90  days,
n   =  25  per  group
Black  tea,  randomized  parallel  group,  3
months,  n  =  47
EGCG,  randomized  parallel  group,  8  weeks,
n  =  88
Tea  extract,  randomized  parallel  group,  3
weeks,  n  =  111
Green  tea  extract,  randomized  parallel  group,  8
weeks,  n  =  35
Black  tea  extract,  randomized  parallel  group,
11   weeks,  n  =  102
Meta-analysis  of  133  green  tea  intervention
studies

Result

Beneﬁt

No  beneﬁt

Beneﬁt

Beneﬁt  on  blood  pressure,
no  beneﬁt  for  lipids
Beneﬁt  on  LDL  and  blood
pressure
Beneﬁt  on  body  weight,  no
beneﬁt  on  LDL
No  beneﬁt

Beneﬁt  on  LDL

LDL  =  low  density  lipoprotein  cholesterol,  HDL  =  high  density  lipoprotein  cholesterol.

as  the  Mediterranean  diet  to  reduce  cardiovascular  risk,  but  none
with  tea.  In  drug  studies,  the  control  group  can  be  randomized  to
a  placebo  and  have  zero  intake  of  the  studied  factor.  Tea,  on  the
other  hand,  is  a  ubiquitous  part  of  the  diet  and  it  is  not  possible  or
ethical  to  have  a  control  group  that  consumes  no  tea  over  the  3–5
years  needed  to  accumulate  a  sufﬁcient  number  of  cardiovascular
events.

A  number  of  other  difﬁculties  would  make  it  extraordinarily  dif-
ﬁcult  to  conduct  a  randomized  clinical  trial  with  tea.  It  remains
unclear  what  type  and  dose  of  tea  to  recommend  or  to  study.
Another  barrier  is  the  question  of  speciﬁc  populations  studied.
Pharmaceutical  studies  focus  on  patients  with  cardiovascular  dis-
ease,  but  the  results  are  not  expected  to  apply  to  the  general
population.  Finally,  there  is  the  question  of  cost.  Clinical  outcome
studies  are  extraordinarily  expensive  and  unlike  pharmaceutical
studies,  there  is  no  sponsor  with  a  proﬁt  motive  to  bear  the  cost  of
studying  a  whole  food,  such  as  tea.

Similar  issues  inﬂuence  the  utility  of  the  available  observational
studies  to  guide  dietary  recommendations.  The  available  epidemio-
logical  studies  suggest  favorable  effects  of  green,  oolong,  and  black
tea  and  beneﬁt  from  modest  to  only  extremely  high  amounts  of
tea  consumption.  Smaller  scale  intervention  studies  looking  at  risk
factors  and  mechanistic  surrogate  endpoints  also  examined  a  wide
variety  and  types  and  doses  of  tea.  Variable  bioavailability  due  to
differences  in  food  matrix  and  human  gut  absorption  further  clouds
the  issue.  Thus,  it  is  remains  extremely  difﬁcult  to  formulate  dietary
recommendations  about  how  much  and  the  type  of  tea  to  consume
for  the  general  population.  Making  recommendations  for  disease
population  is  even  more  problematic.

Another  important  clinical  implication  of  the  reviewed  studies
is  the  potential  use  of  tea  extracts  or  individual  tea  components,
such  as  EGCG,  to  promote  cardiovascular  health  or  prevent  cardio-
vascular  disease.  Food,  beverage  and  dietary  supplement  products
designed  to  promote  heart  health  are  now  a  multi-billion  dollar
category  in  the  U.S.,  with  comparable  markets  in  Europe,  Japan
and  Australia.  In  regard  to  extracts,  there  is  a  lack  of  uniformity
to  the  studied  preparations,  doses,  and  endpoints  that  make  it
hard  to  make  speciﬁc  recommendations  and  as  for  whole  tea,
there  are  no  randomized  outcome  studies.  For  puriﬁed  compo-
nents,  such  as  EGCG,  there  is  a  large  body  of  evidence  for  favorable
effects,  but  studies  suggest  that  the  beneﬁts  are  limited  to  short-
term  acute  effects  reﬂective  of  the  short  plasma  half-life  of  1–2  h
[120].  To  be  beneﬁcial,  some  type  of  slow-release  preparation
would  be  needed  to  provide  a  sustained  increase  in  blood  lev-
els.  Consideration  of  such  preparations  likely  crosses  the  line
from  dietary  supplements  to  drugs,  with  the  attendant  regulatory
issues.

In  2006,  Ito  En,  Ltd.,  a  manufacturer  of  green  tea  and  green  tea
products  ﬁled  a  petition  to  the  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration
(FDA)  to  make  a  qualiﬁed  health  claim  for  green  tea  and  green  tea
extracts  based  on  studies  showing  favorable  effects  on  cardiovas-
cular  disease  risk  factors  [141].  The  FDA  reviewed  observational
studies  that  examined  the  relationship  between  green  tea  and
cardiovascular  disease  endpoints,  including  many  of  the  studies
discussed  in  this  review.  They  also  considered  intervention  stud-
ies  that  examined  the  effects  of  green  tea  on  blood  pressure  and
blood  cholesterol  as  surrogate  endpoints  for  cardiovascular  dis-
ease.  Although  they  considered  many  observational  studies,  they
argued  that  intervention  studies  provide  the  most  scientiﬁcally
valid  information.  For  this  reason,  they  particularly  focused  on  four
intervention  studies  that  failed  to  show  a  beneﬁt  of  green  tea  on
blood  pressure  [34]  and  lipids  [51,87,142]  and  three  intervention
studies  that  failed  to  show  an  effect  of  green  tea  extract  on  choles-
terol  [51,93,143].  On  the  basis  of  these  studies,  they  concluded  that
there  was  no  credible  evidence  to  support  a  relationship  between
consumption  of  green  tea  and  reduced  risk  of  cardiovascular  dis-
ease.  They  cited  the  data  for  vitamin  E  and  folate  as  examples
of  other  dietary  supplements  that  showed  strong  associations  in
observational  studies,  but  no  beneﬁt  in  randomized  trials,  further
justifying  their  decision  to  discount  many  of  the  observational  stud-
ies  suggesting  favorable  effects.  While  they  did  not  ﬁnd  that  green
tea  was   unhealthy,  they  decided  that  the  available  evidence  did  not
support  a  qualiﬁed  health  claim  for  a  beneﬁt  against  cardiovascular
disease.  Table  2  continues  a  partial  list  of  randomized  intervention
studies  examining  effects  of  tea  on  risk  factors  that  have  been  pub-
lished  since  the  FDA  ruling  in  2006.  Many  of  these  studies  show
beneﬁt,  raising  the  possibility  that  the  question  of  a  qualiﬁed  health
claim  for  tea  might  be  reconsidered.

At  this  time,  however,  manufacturers  cannot  make  claims  about
beneﬁts  against  cardiovascular  disease  in  advertising  and  labels  for
green  tea  or  black  tea.  Advertising  claims  are  different  from  guide-
lines  and  recommendations  from  non-commercial  entities,  such  as
the  American  Heart  Association  (AHA).  In  the  most  recent  dietary
guidelines,  the  Nutrition  Committee  of  the  AHA  recommended  that
individuals  consume  a  diet  rich  in  fruits  and  vegetables  to  reduce
the  risk  for  cardiovascular  disease  [144].  Such  a  diet  includes  green
and  black  tea.

6.  Conclusion

In  this  article,  we   have  reviewed  a  representative  portion  of  the
extensive  published  literature  on  tea  and  its  role  in  cardiovascular
disease  prevention.  Some,  but  not  all  observational  studies  sug-
gest  a  reduction  in  cardiovascular  disease.  There  also  are  mixed

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

143

data  about  the  effects  of  tea  on  risk  factors  from  observational  and
intervention  studies.  Mechanistic  studies  in  experimental  models
and  human  subjects  have  identiﬁed  a  number  of  plausible  mech-
anisms  of  beneﬁt,  including  anti-inﬂammatory  and  anti-platelet
effects  as  well  as  favorable  effects  on  the  vascular  endothelium.
No  randomized  trials  have  examined  the  effects  of  tea  on  cardio-
vascular  events,  and  there  are  many  barriers  to  the  conduct  of  such
a  trial.  Thus,  no  deﬁnite  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  the  current
data  and  no  speciﬁc  dietary  recommendations  can  be  made  about
whether  tea  promotes  reduces  risk  for  cardiovascular  disease.  Fur-
thermore,  the  available  literature  does  not  provide  a  clear  answer
about  the  type  and/or  amount  of  tea  that  should  be  consumed  as
part  of  a  heart  healthy  diet.

At  the  present  time,  it  is  clear  that  tea  is  a  popular,  econom-
ical  and  safe  drink  which  is  enjoyed  daily  by  millions  of  people
all  across  the  world.  Given  the  high  consumption  and  distribution
of  tea  worldwide  and  the  potential  health  effects  of  tea,  further
study  is  justiﬁed.  In  the  meantime,  freshly  brewed  green  or  black
tea  appears  to  be  a  reasonable  dietary  choice  to  consider  as  part  of
lifestyle  and  dietary  approach  to  prevent  heart  disease.

Acknowledgments

Dr.  Vita  previously  received  research  grant  support  from  the
North  America  Tea  Trade  Health  Research  Association,  Unilever,
Inc.,  Welch’s,  Inc.,  USANA  Health  Sciences,  Inc.  He  has  current
research  grants  from  DSM  Nutritional  Products,  Ocean  Spray,  Inc.,
The  Almond  Board  of  California.  He  has  received  consultation  fee  or
speaker  honoraria  from  Unilever,  USANA,  DSM,  Ocean  Spray,  and
the  Almond  Board  of  California.  He  also  is  supported  by  research
grants  from  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  (HL083801,  HL081587,
HL083269,  and  HL75795  and  HL102299).

References

[1] Kris-Etherton  PM,  Hecker  KD,  Bonanome  A,  Coval  SM,   Binkoski  AE,  Hilpert  KF,
et   al.  Bioactive  compounds  in  foods:  their  role  in  the  prevention  of  cardiovas-
cular  disease  and  cancer.  Am  J  Med   2002;113(Suppl.  9B):71S–88S.

[2]  Balentine  DA,  Wiseman  SA,  Bouwens  LC.  The  chemistry  of  tea  ﬂavonoids.  Crit

Rev   Food  Sci  Nutr  1997;37:693–704.

[3] Sato  Y,  Nakatsuka  H,  Watanabe  T,  Hisamichi  S,  Shimizu  H,  Fujisaku  S,  et  al.
Possible  contribution  of  green  tea  drinking  habits  to  the  prevention  of  stroke.
Tohoku  J  Exp  Med   1989;157:337–43.

[4]  Nakachi  K,  Matsuyama  S,  Miyake  S,  Suganuma  M,   Imai  K.  Preventive  effects
of   drinking  green  tea  on  cancer  and  cardiovascular  disease:  epidemiological
evidence  for  multiple  targeting  prevention.  Biofactors  2000;13:49–54.

[5]   Kuriyama  S,  Shimazu  T,  Ohmori  K,  Kikuchi  N,  Nakaya  N,  Nishino  Y,  et  al.  Green
tea   consumption  and  mortality  due  to  cardiovascular  disease,  cancer,  and  all
causes  in  Japan:  the  Ohsaki  study.  JAMA  2006;296:1255–65.

[6]  Liang  W,   Lee  AH,  Binns  CW,   Huang  R,  Hu  D,  Zhou  Q.  Tea  consumption
and   ischemic  stroke  risk:  a  case–control  study  in  southern  China.  Stroke
2009;40:2480–5.

[7]  Mineharu  Y,  Koizumi  A,  Wada  Y,  Iso  H,  Watanabe  Y,  Date  C,  et  al.  Coffee,
green  tea,  black  tea  and  oolong  tea  consumption  and  risk  of  mortality  from
cardiovascular  disease  in  Japanese  men   and  women.  J  Epidemiol  Community
Health  2010.

[8]  Sesso  HD,  Gaziano  JM,   Buring  JE,  Hennekens  CH.  Coffee  and  tea  intake  and  the

risk  of  myocardial  infarction.  Am  J  Epidemiol  1999;149:162–7.

[9]  Mukamal  KJ,  Maclure  M,   Muller  JE,  Sherwood  JB,  Mittleman  MA.   Tea
consumption  and  mortality  after  acute  myocardial  infarction.  Circulation
2002;105:2476–81.

[10]  Mukamal  KJ,  Alert  M,   Maclure  M,   Muller  JE,  Mittleman  MA.  Tea  consumption
and   infarct-related  ventricular  arrhythmias:  the  determinants  of  myocardial
infarction  onset  study.  J  Am  Coll  Nutr  2006;25:472–9.

[11] de  Koning  Gans  JM,   Uiterwaal  CS,  van  der  Schouw  YT,  Boer  JM,   Grobbee
DE,   Verschuren  WM,   et  al.  Tea  and  coffee  consumption  and  cardiovascular
morbidity  and  mortality.  Arterioscler  Thromb  Vasc  Biol  2010;30:1665–71.

[12]  Stensvold  I,  Tverdal  A,  Solvoll  K,  Foss  OP.  Tea  consumption.  Relationship
to  cholesterol,  blood  pressure,  and  coronary  and  total  mortality.  Prev  Med
1992;21:546–53.

[13]  Brown  CA,  Bolton-Smith  C,  Woodward  M,   Tunstall-Pedoe  H.  Coffee  and
tea  consumption  and  the  prevalence  of  coronary  heart  disease  in  men   and
women:  results  from  the  Scottish  Heart  Health  Study.  J  Epidemiol  Community
Health  1993;47:171–5.

[14]  Hertog  MG,  Sweetnam  PM,   Fehily  AM,   Elwood  PC,  Kromhout  D.  Antioxidant
ﬂavonols  and  ischemic  heart  disease  in  a  Welsh  population  of  men:  the  Caer-
philly  Study.  Am  J  Clin  Nutr  1997;65:1489–94.

[15]  Vita  JA.  Tea  consumption  and  cardiovascular  disease:  effects  on  endothelial

function.  J  Nutr  2003;133:3293S–7S.

[16]  Sesso  HD,  Gaziano  JM,   Liu  S,  Buring  JE.  Flavonoid  intake  and  the  risk  of  car-

diovascular  disease  in  women.  Am  J  Clin  Nutr  2003;77:1400–8.

[17] Sesso  HD,  Paffenbarger  Jr  RS,  Oguma  Y,  Lee  IM.   Lack  of  association  between  tea
and   cardiovascular  disease  in  college  alumni.  Int  J  Epidemiol  2003;32:527–
33.

[18]  Rimm  EB,  Katan  MB,   Ascherio  A,  Stampfer  MJ,  Willett  WC.   Relation  between
intake  of  ﬂavonoids  and  risk  for  coronary  heart  disease  in  male  health  pro-
fessionals.  Ann  Intern  Med   1996;125:384–9.

[19] Peters  U,  Poole  C,  Arab  L.  Does  tea  affect  cardiovascular  disease?  A  meta-

analysis.  Am  J  Epidemiol  2001;154:495–503.

[20] Arab  L,  Liu  W,   Elashoff  D.  Green  and  black  tea  consumption  and  risk  of  stroke:

a   meta-analysis.  Stroke  2009;40:1786–92.

[21] Hertog  MGL,  Feskens  EJM,  Hollman  PCH,  Martijn  B,  Kromhout  D.  Dietary
antioxidant  ﬂavonoids  and  risk  of  coronary  heart  disease:  the  Zutphen  Elderly
Study.  Lancet  1993;342:1007–11.

[22] Hertog  MGL,  Feskens  EJM,  Kromhout  D.  Antioxidant  ﬂavanols  and  coronary

heart  disease  risk.  Lancet  1997;349:699.

[23]  Keli  SO,  Hertog  MGL,  Feskens  EJM,  Kromhout  D.  Dietary  ﬂavanoids,  antioxi-
dant   vitamins,  and  incidence  of  stroke:  the  Zutphen  study.  Arch  Intern  Med
1996;156(6):637–42.

[24]  Hertog  MGL,  Kromhout  D,  Aravanis  C,  Blackburn  H,  Buzino  R,  Fidanza  F.
Flavonoid  intake  and  long-term  risk  of  coronary  heart  disease  and  cancer
in   the  Seven  Countries  Study.  Arch  Intern  Med   1995;155(4):381–6.

[25]  Hirvonen  T,  Pietinen  P,  Virtanen  M,   Ovaskainen  ML,   Hakkinen  S,  Albanes  D,
et   al.  Intake  of  ﬂavonols  and  ﬂavones  and  risk  of  coronary  heart  disease  in
male  smokers.  Epidemiology  2001;12:62–7.

[26] Huxley  RR,  Neil  HA.  The  relation  between  dietary  ﬂavonol  intake  and  coronary
heart  disease  mortality:  a  meta-analysis  of  prospective  cohort  studies.  Eur  J
Clin   Nutr  2003;57:904–8.

[27]  Hollman  PC,  Geelen  A,  Kromhout  D.  Dietary  ﬂavonol  intake  may   lower  stroke

risk   in  men   and  women.  J  Nutr  2010;140:600–4.

[28]  Hodgson  JM,   Devine  A,  Puddey  IB,  Chan  SY,  Beilin  LJ,  Prince  RL.  Tea  intake  is
inversely  related  to  blood  pressure  in  older  women.  J  Nutr  2003;133:2883–6.
[29]  Chobanian  AV,  Bakris  GL,  Black  HR,  Cushman  WC,   Green  LA,  Izzo  Jr  JL,
et   al.  Seventh  report  of  the  Joint  National  Committee  on  Prevention,  Detec-
tion,  Evaluation,  and  Treatment  of  High  Blood  Pressure.  Hypertension
2003;42:1206–52.

[30]  Yang  YC,  Lu  FH,  Wu   JS,  Wu   CH,  Chang  CJ.  The  protective  effect  of  habitual  tea

consumption  on  hypertension.  Arch  Intern  Med   2004;164:1534–40.

[31] Klatsky  AL,  Friedman  GD,  Armstrong  MA.   The  relationships  between  alcoholic
beverage  use  and  other  traits  to  blood  pressure:  a  new  Kaiser  Permanente
study.  Circulation  1986;73:628–36.

[32] Klatsky  AL,  Armstrong  MA,   Friedman  GD.  Coffee,  tea,  and  mortality.  Ann  Epi-

demiol  1993;3:375–81.

[33]  Wakabayashi  K,  Kono  S,  Shinchi  K,  Honjo  S,  Todoroki  I,  Sakurai  Y,  et  al.  Habitual
coffee  consumption  and  blood  pressure:  a  study  of  self-defense  ofﬁcials  in
Japan.  Eur  J  Epidemiol  1998;14:669–73.

[34] Hodgson  JM,  Puddey  IB,  Burke  V,  Beilin  LJ,  Jordan  N.  Effects  on  blood  pressure

of  drinking  green  and  black  tea.  J  Hypertens  1999;17:457–63.

[35]  Hodgson  JM,   Burke  V,  Puddey  IB.  Acute  effects  of  tea  on  fasting  and  post-
prandial  vascular  function  and  blood  pressure  in  humans.  J  Hypertens
2005;23:47–54.

[36]  Nagao  T,  Hase  T,  Tokimitsu 

in  catechins
reduces  body  fat  and  cardiovascular  risks  in  humans.  Obesity  (Silver  Spring)
2007;15:1473–83.

I.  A  green  tea  extract  high 

[37]  Brown  AL,  Lane  J,  Coverly  J,  Stocks  J,  Jackson  S,  Stephen  A,  et  al.  Effects  of
dietary  supplementation  with  the  green  tea  polyphenol  epigallocatechin-
3-gallate  on 
factors:
randomized  controlled  trial.  Br  J  Nutr  2009;101:886–94.

insulin  resistance  and  associated  metabolic  risk 

[38]  Nantz  MP,  Rowe  CA,  Bukowski  JF,  Percival  SS.  Standardized  capsule  of  Camel-
lia   sinensis  lowers  cardiovascular  risk  factors  in  a  randomized,  double-blind,
placebo-controlled  study.  Nutrition  2009;25:147–54.

[39]  Taubert  D,  Roesen  R,  Schomig  E.  Effect  of  cocoa  and  tea  intake  on  blood

pressure:  a  meta-analysis.  Arch  Intern  Med   2007;167:626–34.

[40]   Kono  S,  Shinchi  K,  Ikeda  N,  Yanai  F,  Imanishi  K.  Green  tea  consumption  and
serum  lipid  proﬁles:  a  cross-sectional  study  in  northern  Kyushu,  Japan.  Prev
Med  1992;21:526–31.

[41]  Hakim  IA,  Alsaif  MA,   Alduwaihy  M,   Al  Rubeaan  K,  Al  Nuaim  AR,  Al  Attas  OS.  Tea
consumption  and  the  prevalence  of  coronary  heart  disease  in  Saudi  adults:
results  from  a  Saudi  national  study.  Prev  Med   2003;36:64–70.

[42]  Tsubono  Y,  Tsugane  S.  Green  tea  intake  in  relation  to  serum  lipid  levels  in

middle-aged  Japanese  men   and  women.  Ann  Epidemiol  1997;7:280–4.

[43]  Davies  MJ,   Judd  JT,  Baer  DJ,  Clevidence  BA,  Paul  DR,  Edwards  AJ,  et  al.  Black
tea  consumption  reduces  total  and  LDL  cholesterol  in  mildly  hypercholes-
terolemic  adults.  J  Nutr  2003;133:3298S–302S.

[44]  Maron  DJ,  Lu  GP,  Cai  NS,  Wu   ZG,  Li  YH,   Chen  H,  et  al.  Cholesterol-lowering
effect  of  a  theaﬂavin-enriched  green  tea  extract:  a  randomized  controlled
trial.   Arch  Intern  Med   2003;163:1448–53.

[45] Unno  T,  Tago  M,   Suzuki  Y,  Nozawa  A,  Sagesaka  YM,   Kakuda  T,  et  al.  Effect  of
tea  catechins  on  postprandial  plasma  lipid  responses  in  human  subjects.  Br  J
Nutr  2005;93:543–7.

144

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

[46]   Erba  D,  Riso  P,  Bordoni  A,  Foti  P,  Biagi  PL,  Testolin  G.  Effectiveness  of  moderate
green  tea  consumption  on  antioxidative  status  and  plasma  lipid  proﬁle  in
humans.  J  Nutr  Biochem  2005;16:144–9.

[47]  Fujita  H,  Yamagami  T.  Antihypercholesterolemic  effect  of  Chinese  black  tea
extract  in  human  subjects  with  borderline  hypercholesterolemia.  Nutr  Res
2008;28:450–6.

[48]  Bertipaglia  dS,  Mandarino  MG,   Cardoso  JR,  Dichi  I,  Dichi  JB,  Camargo  AE,
et   al.  Association  between  soy  and  green  tea  (Camellia  sinensis)  diminishes
hypercholesterolemia  and  increases  total  plasma  antioxidant  potential  in
dyslipidemic  subjects.  Nutrition  2008;24:562–8.

[49]  Basu  A,  Sanchez  K,  Leyva  MJ,   Wu  M,   Betts  NM,  Aston  CE,  et  al.  Green  tea
supplementation  affects  body  weight,  lipids,  and  lipid  peroxidation  in  obese
subjects  with  metabolic  syndrome.  J  Am  Coll  Nutr  2010;29:31–40.

[50] Trautwein  EA,  Du  Y,  Meynen  E,  Yan  X,  Wen   Y,  Wang  H,  et  al.  Puriﬁed  black
tea   theaﬂavins  and  theaﬂavins/catechin  supplements  did  not  affect  serum
lipids  in  healthy  individuals  with  mildly  to  moderately  elevated  cholesterol
concentrations.  Eur  J  Nutr  2010;49:27–35.

[51] Princen  HM,   van  Duyvenvoorde  W,   Buytenhek  R,  Blonk  C,  Tijburg  LB,  Langius
JA,   et  al.  No  effect  of  consumption  of  green  and  black  tea  on  plasma  lipid  and
antioxidant  levels  and  on  LDL  oxidation  in  smokers.  Arterioscler  Thromb  Vasc
Biol   1998;18:833–41.

[52]  Fenercioglu  AK,  Saler  T,  Genc  E,  Sabuncu  H,  Altuntas  Y.  The  effects  of
polyphenol-containing  antioxidants  on  oxidative  stress  and  lipid  peroxida-
tion   in  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  without  complications.  J  Endocrinol  Invest
2010;33:118–24.

[53]  Hooper  L,  Kroon  PA,  Rimm  EB,  Cohn  JS,  Harvey  I,  Le  Cornu  KA,  et  al.  Flavonoids,
ﬂavonoid-rich  foods,  and  cardiovascular  risk:  a  meta-analysis  of  randomized
controlled  trials.  Am  J  Clin  Nutr  2008;88:38–50.

[54]  Mokdad  AH,  Bowman  BA,  Ford  ES,  Vinicor  F,  Marks  JS,  Koplan  JP.  The
continuing  epidemics  of  obesity  and  diabetes  in  the  United  States.  JAMA
2001;286:1195–200.

[55] Iso  H,  Date  C,  Wakai  K,  Fukui  M,   Tamakoshi  A.  The  relationship  between  green
tea   and  total  caffeine  intake  and  risk  for  self-reported  type  2  diabetes  among
Japanese  adults.  Ann  Intern  Med   2006;144:554–62.

[56]  Greenberg  JA,  Axen  KV,  Schnoll  R,  Boozer  CN.  Coffee,  tea  and  diabetes:  the

role  of  weight  loss  and  caffeine.  Int  J  Obes  (Lond)  2005;29:1121–9.

[57]  Hamer  M,   Witte  DR,  Mosdol  A,  Marmot  MG,   Brunner  EJ.  Prospective  study
of   coffee  and  tea  consumption  in  relation  to  risk  of  type  2  diabetes  mellitus
among  men   and  women:  the  Whitehall  II  study.  Br  J  Nutr  2008;100:1046–53.
[58] Song  Y,  Manson  JE,  Buring  JE,  Sesso  HD,  Liu  S.  Associations  of  dietary  ﬂavonoids
with  risk  of  type  2  diabetes,  and  markers  of  insulin  resistance  and  systemic
inﬂammation  in  women:  a  prospective  study  and  cross-sectional  analysis.  J
Am   Coll  Nutr  2005;24:376–84.

[59] Salazar-Martinez  E,  Willett  WC,   Ascherio  A,  Manson  JE,  Leitzmann  MF,
Stampfer  MJ,   et  al.  Coffee  consumption  and  risk  for  type  2  diabetes  mellitus.
Ann   Intern  Med   2004;140:1–8.

[60]  van  Dam  RM,   Willett  WC,   Manson  JE,  Hu  FB.  Coffee,  caffeine,  and  risk  of  type  2
diabetes:  a  prospective  cohort  study  in  younger  and  middle-aged  U.S.  women.
Diabetes  Care  2006;29:398–403.

[61]  Boggs  DA,  Rosenberg  L,  Ruiz-Narvaez  EA,  Palmer  JR.  Coffee,  tea,  and  alcohol
intake  in  relation  to  risk  of  type  2  diabetes  in  African  American  women.  Am  J
Clin  Nutr  2010;92:960–6.

[62] Huxley  R,  Lee  CM,   Barzi  F,  Timmermeister  L,  Czernichow  S,  Perkovic  V,  et  al.
Coffee,  decaffeinated  coffee,  and  tea  consumption  in  relation  to  incident  type
2   diabetes  mellitus:  a  systematic  review  with  meta-analysis.  Arch  Intern  Med
2009;169:2053–63.

[63]  Hosoda  K,  Wang  MF,   Liao  ML,   Chuang  CK,  Iha  M,   Clevidence  B,  et  al.
Antihyperglycemic  effect  of  oolong  tea  in  type  2  diabetes.  Diabetes  Care
2003;26:1714–8.

[64]  Bryans  JA,  Judd  PA,  Ellis  PR.  The  effect  of  consuming  instant  black  tea  on
postprandial  plasma  glucose  and  insulin  concentrations  in  healthy  humans.
J   Am  Coll  Nutr  2007;26:471–7.

[65]  Fukino  Y,  Shimbo  M,   Aoki  N,  Okubo  T,  Iso  H.  Randomized  controlled  trial  for
an  effect  of  green  tea  consumption  on  insulin  resistance  and  inﬂammation
markers.  J  Nutr  Sci  Vitaminol  (Tokyo)  2005;51:335–42.

[66]  Chantre  P,  Lairon  D.  Recent  ﬁndings  of  green  tea  extract  AR25  (Exolise)  and

its   activity  for  the  treatment  of  obesity.  Phytomedicine  2002;9:3–8.

[67]   Nagao  T,  Komine  Y,  Soga  S,  Meguro  S,  Hase  T,  Tanaka  Y,  et  al.  Ingestion  of  a
tea   rich  in  catechins  leads  to  a  reduction  in  body  fat  and  malondialdehyde-
modiﬁed  LDL  in  men.  Am  J  Clin  Nutr  2005;81:122–9.

[68]  Dulloo  AG,  Seydoux  J,  Girardier  L,  Chantre  P,  Vandermander  J.  Green  tea
and  thermogenesis:  interactions  between  catechin-polyphenols,  caffeine  and
sympathetic  activity.  Int  J  Obes  Relat  Metab  Disord  2000;24:252–8.

[69]  Witztum  JL,  Steinberg  D.  Role  of  oxidized  low  density  lipoprotein  in  athero-

genesis.  J  Clin  Invest  1991;88:1785–92.

[70]  Stocker  R,  Keaney  Jr  JF.  The  role  of  oxidative  modiﬁcations  in  atherosclerosis.

Physiol  Rev  2004;84:1381–478.

[71]  Münzel  T,  Keaney  Jr  JF.  Are  ACE-inhibitors  a  “magic  bullet”  against  oxidative

stress?  Circulation  2001;104:1571–4.

[74]  Terao  J,  Piskula  M,   Yao  Q.  Protective  effect  of  epicatechin,  epicatechin  gallate,
and  quercetin  on  lipid  peroxidation  in  phospholipid  bilayers.  Arch  Biochem
Biophys  1994;308:278–84.

[75]  Cherubini  A,  Beal  MF,   Frei  B.  Black  tea  increases  the  resistance  of  human
plasma  to  lipid  peroxidation  in  vitro,  but  not  ex  vivo.  Free  Radic  Biol  Med
1999;27:381–7.

[76]  Nakagawa  T,  Yokozawa  T.  Direct  scavenging  of  nitric  oxide  and  superoxide

by  green  tea.  Food  Chem  Toxicol  2002;40:1745–50.

[77]  Miura  S,  Watanabe  J,  Tomita  T,  Sano  M,   Tomita  I.  The  inhibitory  effects  of  tea
polyphenols  (ﬂavan  3-ol  derivatives)  on  Cu2  mediated  oxidative  modiﬁcation
of   low  density  lipoprotein.  Biol  Pharm  Bull  1994;17(12):1567–72.

[78] Osada  K,  Takahashi  M,   Hoshina  S,  Nakamura  M,  Nakamura  S,  Sugano  M.
Tea  catechins  inhibit  cholesterol  oxidation  accompanying  oxidation  of  low
density  lipoprotein  in  vitro.  Comp  Biochem  Physiol  C  Toxicol  Pharmacol
2001;128:153–64.

[79] Ishikawa  T,  Suzukawa  M,   Ito  T,  Yoshida  H,  Ayaori  M.   Effect  of  tea  ﬂavonoid
supplementation  on  the  susceptibility  of  low-density  lipoprotein  to  oxidative
modiﬁcation.  Am  J  Clin  Nutr  1997;66:261–6.

[80]  Yang  TT,  Koo  MW.   Inhibitory  effect  of  Chinese  green  tea  on  endothelial  cell-

induced  LDL  oxidation.  Atherosclerosis  2000;148:67–73.

[81] Yoshida  H,  Ishikawa  T,  Hosoai  H,  Suzukawa  M,   Ayaori  M,   Hisada  T,  et  al.
Inhibitory  effect  of  tea  ﬂavonoids  on  the  ability  of  cells  to  oxidize  low  density
lipoprotein.  Biochem  Pharmacol  1999;58:1695–703.

[82]  Frei  B,  Higdon  JV.  Antioxidant  activity  of  tea  polyphenols  in  vivo:  evidence

from  animal  studies.  J  Nutr  2003;133:3275S–84S.

[83]  Vinson  JA,  Dabbagh  YA.  Effect  of  green  and  black  tea  supplementation  on
lipids,  lipid  oxidation  and  ﬁbrinogen  in  the  hamster:  mechanisms  for  the
epidemiological  beneﬁts  of  tea  drinking.  FEBS  Lett  1998;433:44–6.

[84]  Tijburg  LB,  Wiseman  SA,  Meijer  GW,   Weststrate  JA.  Effects  of  green  tea,  black
tea   and  dietary  lipophilic  antioxidants  on  LDL  oxidizability  and  atherosclero-
sis  in  hypercholesterolaemic  rabbits.  Atherosclerosis  1997;135:37–47.

[85] Miura  Y,  Chiba  T,  Tomita  I,  Koizumi  H,  Miura  S,  Umegaki  K,  et  al.  Tea  catechins
prevent  the  development  of  atherosclerosis  in  apoprotein  E-deﬁcient  mice.  J
Nutr  2001;131:27–32.

[86]  Seraﬁni  M,   Ghiselli  A,  Ferro-Luzzi  A.  In  vivo  antioxidant  effect  of  green  and

black  tea  in  man.  Eur  J  Clin  Nut  1996;50(1):28–32.

[87]  van  het  H,  de  Boer  HS,  Wiseman  SA,  Lien  N,  Westrate  JA,  Tiburg  LBM.  Con-
sumption  of  green  or  black  tea  does  not  increase  the  resistance  of  LDL  to
oxidation  in  humans.  Am  J  Clin  Nutr  1997;66:1125–32.

[88] Gomikawa  S,  Ishikawa  Y,  Hayase  W,   Haratake  Y,  Hirano  N,  Matuura  H,   et  al.
Effect  of  ground  green  tea  drinking  for  2  weeks  on  the  susceptibility  of
plasma  and  LDL  to  the  oxidation  ex  vivo  in  healthy  volunteers.  Kobe  J  Med  Sci
2008;54:E62–72.

[89] het  Hof  KH,  Wiseman  SA,  Yang  CS,  Tijburg  LB.  Plasma  and  lipoprotein  levels
of   tea  catechins  following  repeated  tea  consumption.  Proc  Soc  Exp  Biol  Med
1999;220:203–9.

[90]  Widlansky  ME,   Duffy  SJ,  Hamburg  NM,   Gokce  N,  Warden  BA,  Wiseman  S,
et  al.  Effects  of  black  tea  consumption  on  plasma  catechins  and  markers  of
oxidative  stress  and  inﬂammation  in  patients  with  coronary  artery  disease.
Free  Radic  Biol  Med   2005;38:499–506.

[91]  Hakim  IA,  Harris  RB,  Brown  S,  Chow  HH,  Wiseman  S,  Agarwal  S,  et  al.  Effect
of  increased  tea  consumption  on  oxidative  DNA  damage  among  smokers:  a
randomized  controlled  study.  J  Nutr  2003;133:3303S–9S.

[92]  Klaunig  JE,  Xu  Y,  Han  C,  Kamendulis  LM,   Chen  J,  Heiser  C,  et  al.  The  effect  of
tea   consumption  on  oxidative  stress  in  smokers  and  nonsmokers.  Proc  Soc
Exp   Biol  Med  1999;220:249–54.

[93]  Freese  R,  Basu  S,  Hietanen  E,  Nair  J,  Nakachi  K,  Bartsch  H,  et  al.  Green  tea  extract
decreases  plasma  malondialdehyde  concentration  but  does  not  affect  other
indicators  of  oxidative  stress,  nitric  oxide  production,  or  hemostatic  factors
during  a  high-linoleic  acid  diet  in  healthy  females.  Eur  J  Nutr  1999;38:149–
57.

[94]  O’Reilly  JD,  Mallet  AI,  McAnlis  GT,  Young  IS,  Halliwell  B,  Sanders  TA,  et  al.
Consumption  of  ﬂavonoids  in  onions  and  black  tea:  lack  of  effect  on  F(2)-
isoprostanes  and  autoantibodies  to  oxidized  LDL  in  healthy  humans.  Am  J
Clin  Nutr  2001;73:1040–4.

[95]  Libby  P.  Atherosclerosis:  the  new  view.  Sci  Am  2002;286:46–55.
[96]  Hofbauer  R,  Frass  M,   Gmeiner  B,  Handler  S,  Speiser  W,   Kapiotis  S.  The  green
tea  extract  epigallocatechin  gallate  is  able  to  reduce  neutrophil  transmi-
gration  through  monolayers  of  endothelial  cells.  Wien  Klin  Wochenschr
1999;111:278–82.
[97]  Sartor  L,  Pezzato  E,  Garbisa  S.  (−)Epigallocatechin-3-gallate  inhibits  leukocyte
elastase:  potential  of  the  phyto-factor  in  hindering  inﬂammation,  emphy-
sema,  and  invasion.  J  Leukoc  Biol  2002;71:73–9.

[98]  Dona  M,   Dell’Aica  I,  Calabrese  F,  Benelli  R,  Morini  M,   Albini  A,  et  al.  Neutrophil
restraint  by  green  tea:  inhibition  of  inﬂammation,  associated  angiogenesis,
and  pulmonary  ﬁbrosis.  J  Immunol  2003;170:4335–41.
[99] Takano  K,  Nakaima  K,  Nitta  M,   Shibata  F,  Nakagawa  H.  Inhibitory  effect
of   (−)-epigallocatechin  3-gallate,  a  polyphenol  of  green  tea,  on  neutrophil
chemotaxis  in  vitro  and  in  vivo.  J  Agric  Food  Chem  2004;52:4571–6.

[72]  Morel  I,  Lescoat  G,  Cogrel  P,  Sergent  O,  Pasdeloup  N,  Brissot  P,  et  al.  Antiox-
idant  and  iron-chelating  activities  of  the  ﬂavonoids  catechin,  quercetin
and   diosmetin  on  iron-loaded  rat  hepatocyte  cultures.  Biochem  Pharmacol
1993;45:13–9.

[73] Katiyar  SK,  Agarwal  R,  Mukhtar  H.  Inhibition  of  spontaneous  and  photo-
enhanced  lipid  peroxidation  in  mouse  epidermal  microsomes  by  epicatechin
derivatives  from  green  tea.  Cancer  Lett  1994;79:61–6.

[100]  Kawai  K,  Tsuno  NH,  Kitayama  J,  Okaji  Y,  Yazawa  K,  Asakage  M,   et  al.  Epigallo-
catechin  gallate  attenuates  adhesion  and  migration  of  CD8+  T  cells  by  binding
to   CD11b.  J  Allergy  Clin  Immunol  2004;113:1211–7.

[101]  Ludwig  A,  Lorenz  M,   Grimbo  N,  Steinle  F,  Meiners  S,  Bartsch  C,  et  al.  The
tea   ﬂavonoid  epigallocatechin-3-gallate  reduces  cytokine-induced  VCAM-1
expression  and  monocyte  adhesion  to  endothelial  cells.  Biochem  Biophys  Res
Commun  2004;316:659–65.

A.  Deka,  J.A.  Vita  /  Pharmacological  Research  64 (2011) 136–  145

145

[102]  Yang  F,  de  Villiers  WJ,   McClain  CJ,  Varilek  GW.   Green  tea  polyphenols
block  endotoxin-induced  tumor  necrosis  factor-production  and  lethality  in
a   murine  model.  J  Nutr  1998;128:2334–40.

[103]  Sueoka  N,  Suganuma  M,   Sueoka  E,  Okabe  S,  Matsuyama  S,  Imai  K,  et  al.  A  new
function  of  green  tea:  prevention  of  lifestyle-related  diseases.  Ann  NY  Acad
Sci   2001;928:274–80.

[104]  De  Bacquer  D,  Clays  E,  Delanghe  J,  De  Backer  G.  Epidemiological  evidence
for  an  association  between  habitual  tea  consumption  and  markers  of  chronic
inﬂammation.  Atherosclerosis  2006;189:428–35.

[105] Maki  T,  Pham  NM,   Yoshida  D,  Yin  G,  Ohnaka  K,  Takayanagi  R,  et  al.  The  rela-
tionship  of  coffee  and  green  tea  consumption  with  high-sensitivity  C-reactive
protein  in  Japanese  men   and  women.  Clin  Chem  Lab  Med   2010;48:849–54.

[106]  Villegas  R,  Xiang  YB,  Cai  H,  Elasy  T,  Cai  Q,  Zhang  X,  et  al.  Lifestyle  determi-
nants  of  C-reactive  protein  in  middle-aged,  urban  Chinese  men.  Nutr  Metab
Cardiovasc  Dis  2010.

[107] Chun  OK,  Chung  SJ,  Claycombe  KJ,  Song  WO.   Serum  C-reactive  protein  concen-
trations  are  inversely  associated  with  dietary  ﬂavonoid  intake  in  U.S.  adults.
J   Nutr  2008;138:753–60.

[108]  Esmaillzadeh  A,  Kimiagar  M,   Mehrabi  Y,  Azadbakht  L,  Hu  FB,  Willett  WC.   Fruit
and  vegetable  intakes,  C-reactive  protein,  and  the  metabolic  syndrome.  Am  J
Clin  Nutr  2006;84:1489–97.

[109]  Neyestani  TR,  Shariatzade  N,  Kalayi  A,  Gharavi  A,  Khalaji  N,  Dadkhah  M,   et  al.
Regular  daily  intake  of  black  tea  improves  oxidative  stress  biomarkers  and
decreases  serum  C-reactive  protein  levels  in  type  2  diabetic  patients.  Ann
Nutr  Metab  2010;57:40–9.

[110]  Steptoe  A,  Gibson  EL,  Vuononvirta  R,  Hamer  M,   Wardle  J,  Rycroft  JA,  et  al.
The  effects  of  chronic  tea  intake  on  platelet  activation  and  inﬂammation:  a
double-blind  placebo  controlled  trial.  Atherosclerosis  2007;193:277–82.

[111]  Oyama  J,  Maeda  T,  Kouzuma  K,  Ochiai  R,  Tokimitsu  I,  Higuchi  Y,  et  al.  Green
tea  catechins  improve  human  forearm  endothelial  dysfunction  and  have
antiatherosclerotic  effects  in  smokers.  Circ  J  2010;74:578–88.

[112] Lee  W,   Min   WK,   Chun  S,  Lee  YW,   Park  H,  Lee  DH,  et  al.  Long-term  effects
of   green  tea  ingestion  on  atherosclerotic  biological  markers  in  smokers.  Clin
Biochem  2005;38:84–7.

[113]  Basu  A,  Du  M,   Sanchez  K,  Leyva  MJ,  Betts  NM,   Blevins  S,  et  al.  Green  tea  min-
imally  affects  biomarkers  of  inﬂammation  in  obese  subjects  with  metabolic
syndrome.  Nutrition  2010.

[114]  Tabit  CE,  Chung  WB,   Hamburg  NM,   Vita  JA.  Endothelial  dysfunction  in  diabetes
mellitus:  molecular  mechanisms  and  clinical  implications.  Rev  Endocr  Metab
Disord  2010;11:61–74.

[115]  Duffy  SJ,  Keaney  Jr  JF,  Holbrook  M,   Gokce  N,  Swerdloff  PL,  Frei  B,  et  al.  Short-
and   long-term  black  tea  consumption  reverses  endothelial  dysfunction  in
patients  with  coronary  artery  disease.  Circulation  2001;104:151–6.

[116] Hodgson  JM,   Puddey  IB,  Burke  V,  Watts  GF,  Beilin  LJ.  Regular  ingestion
of   black  tea  improves  brachial  artery  vasodilator  function.  Clin  Sci  (Lond)
2002;102:195–201.

[117]  Alexopoulos  N,  Vlachopoulos  C,  Aznaouridis  K,  Baou  K,  Vasiliadou  C,  Pietri  P,
et   al.  The  acute  effect  of  green  tea  consumption  on  endothelial  function  in
healthy  individuals.  Eur  J  Cardiovasc  Prev  Rehabil  2008;15:300–5.

[118]  Kim  W,   Jeong  MH,   Cho  SH,  Yun  JH,  Chae  HJ,  Ahn  YK,  et  al.  Effect  of  green  tea
consumption  on  endothelial  function  and  circulating  endothelial  progenitor
cells  in  chronic  smokers.  Circ  J  2006;70:1052–7.

[119] Jochmann  N,  Lorenz  M,   Krosigk  A,  Martus  P,  Bohm  V,  Baumann  G,  et  al.  The
efﬁcacy  of  black  tea  in  ameliorating  endothelial  function  is  equivalent  to  that
of   green  tea.  Br  J  Nutr  2008;99:863–8.

[120]  Widlansky  ME,   Hamburg  NM,   Anter  E,  Holbrook  M,   Kahn  DF,  Elliott  JG,  et  al.
Acute  EGCG  supplementation  reverses  endothelial  dysfunction  in  patients
with  coronary  artery  disease.  J  Am  Coll  Nutr  2007;26:95–102.

[121]  Ryu  OH,  Lee  J,  Lee  KW,   Kim  HY,  Seo  JA,  Kim  SG,  et  al.  Effects  of  green
insulin  resistance  and  pulse  wave
in  type  2  diabetes  patients.  Diabetes  Res  Clin  Pract  2006;71:

inﬂammation, 

tea  consumption  on 
velocity 
356–8.

[122]  Lorenz  M,  Wessler  S,  Follmann  E,  Michaelis  W,   Dusterhoft  T,  Baumann
G,   et  al.  A  constituent  of  green  tea,  epigallocatechin-3-gallate,  activates
endothelial  nitric  oxide  synthase  by  a  phosphatidylinositol-3-OH-kinase-,
cAMP-dependent  protein  kinase-,  and  Akt-dependent  pathway  and  leads
to   endothelial-dependent  vasorelaxation. 
J  Biol  Chem  2004;279:6190–
5.

[123]  Anter  E,  Thomas  SR,  Schulz  E,  Shapira  OM,   Vita  JA,  Keaney  Jr  JF.  Activation
of   eNOS  by  the  p38  MAP   kinase  in  response  to  black  tea  polyphenols.  J  Biol
Chem  2004;45:46637–43.

[124]  Kim  JA,  Formoso  G,  Li  Y,  Potenza  MA,   Marasciulo  FL,  Montagnani  M,  et  al.
Epigallocatechin  gallate,  a  green  tea  polyphenol,  mediates  NO-dependent
vasodilation  using  signaling  pathways  in  vascular  endothelium  requiring
reactive  oxygen  species  and  Fyn.  J  Biol  Chem  2007;282:13736–45.

[125]  Anter  E,  Chen  K,  Shapira  OM,   Karas  RH,  Keaney  Jr  JF.  p38  mitogen-activated
protein  kinase  activates  eNOS  in  endothelial  cells  by  an  estrogen  receptor
alpha-dependent  pathway  in  response  to  black  tea  polyphenols.  Circ  Res
2005;96:1072–8.

[126]  Li  Y,  Ying  C,  Zuo  X,  Yi  H,  Yi  W,   Meng  Y,  et  al.  Green  tea  polyphenols  down-
regulate  caveolin-1  expression  via  ERK1/2  and  p38MAPK  in  endothelial  cells.
J   Nutr  Biochem  2009;20:1021–7.

[127] Zang  M,   Xu  S,  Maitland-Toolan  KA,  Zuccollo  A,  Hou  X,  Jiang  B,  et  al.
Polyphenols  stimulate  AMP-activated  protein  kinase,  lower  lipids,  and  inhibit
accelerated  atherosclerosis  in  diabetic  LDL  receptor-deﬁcient  mice.  Diabetes
2006;55:2180–91.
[128] Kang  WS,   Lim  IH,  Yuk  DY,  Chung  KH,  Park  JB,  Yoo  HS,  et  al.  Antithrombotic
activities  of  green  tea  catechins  and  (−)-epigallocatechin  gallate.  Thromb  Res
1999;96:229–37.

[129]  Kang  WS,   Chung  KH,  Chung  JH,  Lee  JY,  Park  JB,  Zhang  YH,  et  al.  Antiplatelet
activity  of  green  tea  catechins  is  mediated  by  inhibition  of  cytoplasmic  cal-
cium  increase.  J  Cardiovasc  Pharmacol  2001;38:875–84.

[130]  Jin  YR,  Im  JH,  Park  ES,  Cho  MR,   Han  XH,  Lee  JJ,  et  al.  Antiplatelet  activity  of
epigallocatechin  gallate  is  mediated  by  the  inhibition  of  PLCgamma2  phos-
phorylation,  elevation  of  PGD2  production,  and  maintaining  calcium-ATPase
activity.  J  Cardiovasc  Pharmacol  2008;51:45–54.

[131]  Sugatani  J,  Fukazawa  N,  Ujihara  K,  Yoshinari  K,  Abe  I,  Noguchi  H,  et  al.  Tea
polyphenols  inhibit  acetyl-CoA:1-alkyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine  acetyl-
transferase  (a  key  enzyme  in  platelet-activating  factor  biosynthesis)  and
platelet-activating  factor-induced  platelet  aggregation. 
Int  Arch  Allergy
Immunol  2004;134:17–28.

[132]  Hodgson  JM,  Puddey  IB,  Mori  TA,  Burke  V,  Baker  RI,  Beilin  LJ.  Effects  of  regular
ingestion  of  black  tea  on  haemostasis  and  cell  adhesion  molecules  in  humans.
Eur  J  Clin  Nutr  2001;55:881–6.

[133]  Duffy  SJ,  Vita  JA,  Holbrook  M,  Swerdloff  PL,  Keaney  Jr  JF.  Effect  of  acute  and
chronic  tea  consumption  on  platelet  aggregation  in  patients  with  coronary
artery  disease.  Arterioscler  Thromb  Vasc  Biol  2001;21:1084–9.

[134]  Chyu  KY,  Babbidge  SM,   Zhao  X,  Dandillaya  R,  Rietveld  AG,  Yano  J,  et  al.  Differ-
ential  effects  of  green  tea-derived  catechin  on  developing  versus  established
atherosclerosis  in  apolipoprotein  E-null  mice.  Circulation  2004.

[135] Ahn  HY,  Hadizadeh  KR,  Seul  C,  Yun  YP,  Vetter  H,  Sachinidis  A.
Epigallocathechin-3  gallate  selectively  inhibits  the  PDGF-BB-induced  intra-
cellular  signaling  transduction  pathway  in  vascular  smooth  muscle  cells  and
inhibits  transformation  of  sis-transfected  NIH  3T3  ﬁbroblasts  and  human
glioblastoma  cells  (A172).  Mol   Biol  Cell  1999;10:1093–104.

[136] Maeda  K,  Kuzuya  M,   Cheng  XW,   Asai  T,  Kanda  S,  Tamaya-Mori  N,  et  al.  Green
tea  catechins  inhibit  the  cultured  smooth  muscle  cell  invasion  through  the
basement  barrier.  Atherosclerosis  2003;166:23–30.

[137] Han  DW,   Lee  JJ,  Jung  DY,  Park  JC,  Hyon  SH.  Development  of  epigallocatechin
gallate-eluting  polymeric  stent  and  its  physicochemical,  biomechanical  and
biological  evaluations.  Biomed  Mater  2009;4:044104.

[138]  Dohadwala  MM,   Vita  JA.  Grapes  and  cardiovascular  disease.  J  Nutr  2009.
[139] Maron  DJ.  Flavonoids  for  reduction  of  atherosclerotic  risk.  Curr  Atheroscler

Rep  2004;6:73–8.

[140]  Buijsse  B,  Feskens  EJ,  Kok  FJ,  Kromhout  D.  Cocoa  intake,  blood  pressure,
and  cardiovascular  mortality:  the  Zutphen  Elderly  Study.  Arch  Intern  Med
2006;166:411–7.

[141]  Food  and  Drug  Administration  [Internet].  Qualiﬁed  health  claims:  letter
of   denial  –  green  tea  and  reduced  risk  of  cardiovascular  disease  (Docket
No.   2005Q-0297);  2006 
from:
http://www.fda.gov/Food/LabelingNutrition/LabelClaims/QualiﬁedHealth
Claims/ucm073207.htm.

[Cited  2010  December  23].  Available 

[142]  Hirano-Ohmori  R,  Takahashi  R,  Momiyama  Y,  Taniguchi  H,  Yonemura  A,  Tamai
S,   et  al.  Green  tea  consumption  and  serum  malondialdehyde-modiﬁed  LDL
concentrations  in  healthy  subjects.  J  Am  Coll  Nutr  2005;24:342–6.

[143]  Young  JF,  Dragstedt  LO,  Haraldsdottir  J,  Daneshvar  B,  Kall  MA,  Loft  S,  et  al.
Green  tea  extract  only  affects  markers  of  oxidative  status  postprandially:
lasting  antioxidant  effect  of  ﬂavonoid-free  diet.  Br  J  Nutr  2002;87:343–55.

[144]  Lichtenstein  AH,  Appel  LJ,  Brands  M,   Carnethon  M,   Daniels  S,  Franch  HA,
et   al.  Diet  and  lifestyle  recommendations  revision  2006:  a  scientiﬁc  state-
ment  from  the  American  Heart  Association  Nutrition  Committee.  Circulation
2006;114:82–96.

