Saturday 12 December 1981

EFFECT OF DIET AND SMOKING

INTERVENTION ON THE INCIDENCE OF

CORONARY HEART DISEASE

Report from the Oslo Study Group of a Randomised

Trial in Healthy Men

I. HJERMANN

K. VELVE BYRE

I.  HOLME
P. LEREN
Medical Outpatient Clinic,  Ullevaal Hospital,

Oslo Department of Health and Life Insurance Companies’ Institute

for Medical Statistics,  Oslo, Norway

Summary 

16 202  men,  aged  40-49  years,  were
screened for coronary risk factors. Of these,
1232 healthy,  normotensive men at high risk  of coronary
heart disease (CHD) were selected for a 5-year randomised
trial to show whether lowering of serum lipids and cessation
of smoking could reduce the incidence of CHD. Men were
admitted to the trial if they had serum cholesterol levels of
7.5&mdash;9.8  mmol/l (290-380  mg/dl),  coronary  risk  scores
(based  on  cholesterol  levels,  smoking  habits,  and  blood
pressure)  in  the  upper quartile  of the  distribution,  and
systolic blood pressures below 150 mm Hg (mean of two
measurements).

The men in the intervention group were recommended to
lower  their  blood  lipids  by change  of diet  and  to  stop
smoking.  Mean  serum  cholesterol  concentrations  were
approximately 13% lower in the intervention group than in
the control group during the trial (based on the difference
between the mean of 3 prerandomisation values and the mean
of yearly  values  during  the  trial).  Mean fasting  serum
triglycerides fell by 20% in the intervention group compared
with controls. 80% of the men in both groups smoked tobacco
daily at the start of the study. The mean tobacco consumption
per man decreased by 45% more in the intervention group
than in the control group. However, only 25% of the smokers
in  the  intervention  group  completely  stopped  smoking
compared with 17% in the control group. Diagnosis of events
of cardiovascular disease during the study was made blindly
according  to  predefined  criteria  by two cardiologists  not
involved in the study. At the end of the observation period the
incidence of myocardial infarction (fatal and non-fatal) and
sudden death was 47% lower in the intervention group than

in the controls (p=0.028, two-tailed log rank test). When the
incidence of strokes was added, the difference between the
groups was still significant.

It is concluded that in healthy middle-aged men at high risk
of CHD advice to change eating habits and to stop smoking
significantly  reduced  the  incidence  of the  first  event  of
myocardial infarction and sudden death. Statistical analysis,
by  Cox’s  proportional  hazards  model  shows  that  the
reduction in incidence in the intervention group is correlated
with the reduction in total cholesterol and to a lesser extent
with smoking reduction.

Introduction

IMPROVED hospital  care  has  lowered hospital mortality
from acute coronary heart disease (CHD). However, the goal
of a sizeable reduction in the prevalence of CHD in the young
and the middle-aged can be achieved only by preventing or
postponing the disease.

Many studies  have shown that  certain  factors,  such as
hyperlipidaemia, smoking, and raised blood pressure,  are
statistically associated with the risk of cardiovascular disease
developing.1-’ However, this association does not prove that
they  are  causes  of  cardiovascular  disease;  therefore
intervention  trials  have been carried  out.g-’3  These trials
have not shown unequivocal results except for the beneficial
effect of antihypertensive treatment on prevention of stroke.
No controlled  intervention  trials  on healthy middle-aged
subjects at high risk of CHD have been carried out.

The purpose of our study was to  find  out whether the
lowering of high levels of blood lipids by dietary changes and
the cessation of smoking, if maintained for many years, would
lead to reduction in the incidence of first attacks of CHD in
men aged 40-50 years.

Subjects

Subjects and Methods

All Oslo men aged 40-49 years and a 7% sample of men aged
20-39 years were invited for screening of coronary risk  factors
during 1972-73. 65% (16 202 men) of the group aged 40-49 years
attended  the  screening.  Recall  letters  were  not  sent  to  non-
attenders. From this cohort, healthy normotensive men with high
risk of CHD were selected for a controlled trial if they had serum
cholesterol levels (mean of two measurements) of 7 - 5-9 - 8 mmol/1
(290-380 mg/dl), coronary risk scores (based on cholesterol levels,

8259

1304

smoking habits, and blood pressure) in the upper quartile of the
distribution,  and  systolic  blood  pressures  (mean  of  two
measurements)  below  150  mmHg. Those selected  had normal
electrocardiograms (ECG) at  rest and no chest pain on exercise:
ischaemic exercise ECG was not a reason for exclusion from the trial
unless accompanied by angina.  Other causes of exclusion were
disease of the cardiovascular system, clinical diabetes, fasting blood
sugar  levels  above  7-5 mmol/1 (135  mg/dl),  cancer,  disabling
disease, psychopathological disease, and alcoholism.

A short diet history of 8 items giving subscores as shown below

was taken before randomisation.

Diet item 
Butter or polyunsaturated margarine on bread. 
Whole or skimmed milk. 
Cream. 
Cheese. 
Meat, lean or fat. 
Eggs/week. 
Snacks, cakes, chocolate., 
Polyunsaturated oil in cooking. 
Totalscore 

Score range
0-8
0-8
0-4
0-6
0-6
0-5
0-5
0-8
0-50

Total scores ranged from 0 to 50. Subjects with scores of 30 or
more were  defined  as  being  on lipid-lowering  diets  and were
excluded from the trial before randomisation.

We wrote to the men who met the selection criteria, explaining the
experimental design of the trial.  97% of those who received our
letter  were  willing  to  participate  and signed  a  declaration  of
willingness. They were told that the study was expected to last at
least 5 years.

The  sample  size  was  calculated  on  the  basis  of an  earlier
prospective study of myocardial infarction (MI) in this age group in
Oslo.3 With a mean starting cholesterol level of 8-5 mmol/1 (329
mg/dl), a sample size of 615 in each group would give a 60% chance
of discovering a 50% fall in incidence at the 5% level of significance.
In addition, cessation of smoking in the intervention group would
probably add to the statistical power of the trial.

The screening and the electronic data-processing procedures, the
calculation of coronary risk score, the methods of clinical and ECG
examinations, and the laboratory methods have been described in
earlier reports. 14-16

Comparability.-There were no significant differences between
the intervention and control groups for any of the factors shown in
table I.  After the screening examination, two re-examinations were
made before randomisation, the first of these when the subjects were
fasting. The average cholesterol level at the first two examinations

TABLE I-COMPARABILITY OF STUDY GROUPS BEFORE TRIAL

*Value &plusmn;1  SD. Subjects were non-fasting at the screening examination and
1st  re-examination.  SBP=systolic  blood  pressure;
fasting  at  the 
DBP=diastolic blood pressure.

ranged from 7 - 5 to 9 - 8 mmol/1. Men with an average cholesterol
level  above  the  limit  of  9-8 mmol/1  were  not  subjected  to
randomisation but were referred for treatment.

Exercise-ECG test and a clinical examination were done on the
day of the second re-examination. The men were non-fasting, but
were advised to avoid any heavy meal and smoking for 1  h before the
test. A chair ergometer was used with stepwise-increasing loads of
300,600,900, and 1200 kp.m/min, 6 min on each load, up to 85% of
maximum age-adjusted heart rate,  or to exhaustion. 6-standard, 6
precordial, and 6 right chest leads were used. Both resting ECG and
exercise ECG were recorded by technical personnel not involved in
the study. The ECG was identified by a code number: the results
were analysed blindly by a cardiologist outside the study group. At
this stage the ECG examination (resting and exercise) was used only
as a supplement to the clinical examination, in order to exclude
those with angina on exercise. Depression of the ST interval on
exercise ECG was not a reason for exclusion from the trial unless it
was accompanied by angina or other symptoms or signs of heart
disease.  Thus,  some subjects  with "silent"  ST depressions  on
exercise fulfilled the criteria of being healthy and were subjected to
randomisation. None of the authors have been able to identify these
men  either  at  randomisation  or  during  the  following  years.
Therefore,  the  inclusion  of "silent"  ST depressions  did  not
introduce any bias.

If  the  inclusion  criteria  were  satisfied,  randomisation  was
undertaken immediately after  the  exercise  test.  Each man was
allocated to the intervention group or the control group by entering
his  name on the first  open line in a protocol marked in advance
according  to  a  randomisation  system.  The protocol  was never
available to the investigators.

Methods

Intervention methods. -One of us (I. Hjermann) talked for 10- 15
min individually to the men in the intervention group about the risk-
factor  concept  and  the  purpose  of the  study.  The  dietitian
established a diet record for each man by means of a standardised
questionnaire. Dietary advice based on this record, on body weight,
serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels,  and the man’s general
background, was given in the course of a 30 min talk.  For those
subjects with high cholesterol levels as the only risk factor, the diet
change consisted mainly of a reduction in saturated fat intake and a
slight  increase  in  polyunsaturated fat  intake.  For subjects with
elevated fasting triglyceride levels,  both overweight and normal
weight, a reduction in total energy intake (mainly by reducing sugar,
alcohol, and fat intake) was also recommended. For sandwiches we
recommended fibre-rich bread with either no margarine or a thin
layer  of  low-fat  or  high-polyunsaturated  margarine;  fish  or
vegetable filling was preferable, but low-fat cheese or meat was also
acceptable. We also recommended subjects to use skimmed milk and
not to  eat  more than  1  egg weekly. For main meals we advised
subjects to eat fish, whalemeat, and low-fat meat with potatoes and
vegetables. We advised that polyunsaturated oil should be used for
cooking,  baking,  and sauces and that  fruit  should be eaten for
dessert.  Reduced intake  of sugar,  sweet  drinks,  and alcoholic
beverages was specifically recommended when reduction in calorie
intake  was  advisable  (for  over-weight  subjects  and those  with
hypertriglyceridaemia). Anti-smokingadvice was given individually
to all smokers in the intervention group. They were informed that
cessation of smoking might be of special importance for those with
high blood lipid levels. The wives of the subjects in the intervention
group were invited in groups of 30-40 together with their husbands
for  diet  and smoking information.  Other risk  factors  were  not
subjected to intervention.

Follow-up examinations.-One of us (I.  Hjermann) re-exammed
subjects  in  the  intervention  group every 6  months and control
subjects  every  12  months.  Follow-up  included  a  short  clinical
examination with special emphasis on cardiovascular symptoms.
body weight, blood pressure,  serum cholesterol and tngtycende
levels, and a 12-lead resting ECG. At each follow-up the men in the
intervention  group were asked about their  eating  and smoking
habits. A cholesterol curve was made for each man and shoBB n to
him.

Adherence to diet was assessed at each follow-up examination in the
intervention group. At 5-year follow-up a random sample of half the
men in the intervention group was given the same diet interview as
at  start  of the  trial.  The best  responders (whose reduction  in
cholesterol levels was in the highest quintile of the distribution)
ingested more fish and vegetables, more skimmed rather than whole
milk, less saturated-fat margarine, and more polyunsaturated fats in
cooking and in margarine (table 11).  The dietary changes were also
analysed in a food weighing survey, comparing good diet responders
with closely matched controls. The results of this survey have been
reported elsewhere,17 and the most important data are shown in
table III. 

-

Follow-up compliance was good.  Only 1  control subject and 9
subjects from the intervention group refused to attend for the 5-year
exercise-ECG examination.  In addition,  2  control-group  and 5
intervention-group  subjects  had  moved  to  other  parts  of the
country. We had no information at the end of the observation period
for only 5 subjects of the 1192 still alive.

Statistics.-Differences between proportions were tested by the
x2_test, differences between mean values by a t test accounting for

TABLE II-DIETARY DATA FROM THE HIGHEST AND LOWEST QUINTILES
OF  CHOLESTEROL  LOWERING  WITHIN  A  REPRESENTATIVE  HALF

’ 

(n = 300) OF THE INTERVENTION GROUP

Cholesterol lowering was defined as the percentage reduction from the mean of
3 prerandomisation values to the mean of the yearly values during the trial. In
the highest quintile the mean cholesterol lowering was 23-5%, and in the
lowest qumtile 0’5%.

TABLE III-DIET MEASUREMENT AFTER 4 YEARS OF TRIAL IN

SUBGROUPS OF INTERVENTION AND CONTROL GROUP SUBJECTS

I  caL-4-2 2 Joule. NS = not significant.

1305

unequal variances  in  groups,  and differences  between survival
curves by the log-rank test.

In an effort to separate the effects on CHD incidence of reducing
cigarette consumption and of reducing serum cholesterol, a Cox’s
proportional  hazards  model  with  1-year  piecewise  constant
underlying  hazard  function  was  chosen,18  with  the  following
explanatory  variables:  change  in  serum cholesterol,  change  in
cigarette consumption, initial  serum cholesterol,  initial  cigarette
consumption, and initial age. The model was used in an attempt to
quantitate the separate contribution of the cholesterol and cigarette
factors,  adjusting for  the  other  factors.  An extensive  statistical
analysis appears elsewher&egrave;. 19

The cardiovascular events counted were fatal and non-fatal MI,
sudden  death,  and stroke.  All  events  were  diagnosed  by  two
cardiologists who were not involved in the study and did not know to
which group the men belonged. The diagnostic criteria used were
strictly defined before the start of the study, and included clinical
symptoms (typical  chest  pain,  lack  of effect  of nitroglycerin,
duration of pain), ECG findings (Minnesota code, 1-1 and 1-2) and
enzyme changes (increase in aspartate aminotransferase [ASAT]
activity to 50 U or to 40 U if this represented a 10007o increase).
In addition, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, temperature
curve, leucocytosis, and pericardial friction rub were included in-the
criteria, if present. In fatal events necropsy findings were also used.
Sudden death was defined as death within 1  h of start of symptoms.
Sudden coronary death was defined as a sudden death which met
one or more of the following criteria: typical chest pains, known
CHD, certain ECG changes during the actual episode, or necropsy
findings  excluding  other  causes  of  sudden  death.  Detailed
diagnostic criteria were listed. Only one event was counted for each
subject. The order was: fatal coronary event, fatal cerebrovascular
event, other fatal vascular event, sudden unexplained death, non-
fatal MI, non-fatal stroke. However, in the "life table" presentation,
only the time that elapsed before the first  event was calculated.
Coronary events  less  severe  than  non-fatal  MI have  not  been
included in this report.

Effect on Risk Factors

Results

The intervention of advice on smoking and eating habits
resulted  in  changes  in  several  risk  variables  as  earlier
reported.16 Some data on smoking and serum lipid changes
are summarised in fig.  1. In the intervention group there was
a reduction of 17% of mean serum cholesterol from screening
to first follow-up. The mean difference in serum cholesterol
between the two groups during the 5 years was 13%.

Distribution of deciles of men according to their  serum
cholesterol change shows that about 90% of the intervention-
group men reduced their serum cholesterol levels during the
trial.  The mean of the  average  values  of fasting  serum
triglyceride levels was 20% lower and the mean of average
non-fasting serum triglyceride levels was 25% lower in the
intervention  group  than  in  the  control  group.  Tobacco
consumption (expressed as number of cigarettes per man per
day; pipe smoking is included taking one pack of pipe tobacco
weekly to equal 7 cigarettes daily) fell about 45% more in the
intervention  group  than  in  the  controls.  The data  were
assessed by a questionnaire and controlled by the thiocyanate
method (data not given). Some data from subgroups are given
in tables  III  and iv.  The ratio  of high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) cholesterol to the other serum cholesterol fractions
was considerably higher (66%) 4 years after intervention in a
subgroup of good diet responders than in controls closely
matched  with  respect  to  initial  HDL-cholesterol  and
triglyceride  levels  (mean and frequency distribution)  and
with respect to total cholesterol levels, body weight, cigarette
smoking, level of physical activity, and diet score, all recorded
before randomisation. The reduction in saturated fat intake

1306

Fig. 1-Intervention effects on serum cholesterol, triglycerides, and smoking.

Pipe smoking is included; 50 g pipe tobacco/week equals 7 cigarettes/day.

in the intervention group is the most important feature of the
4-year diet data for these subgroups (table III);  this led to a
substantial difference between the groups in both total fat
intake and the polyunsaturated:saturated ratio (P:S ratio).

Effect on Clinical Events

The incidence of fatal and non-fatal MI and sudden death is
shown as a life  table in fig.  2.  The difference between the
intervention and control groups is significant (p = 0’ 03, two-
tailed test). The number of cardiovascular events is given in
table V. As the design of the study was based on events of MI
plus sudden death, the incidence of coronary events is most
important. Total number of deaths is shown in table vi. All
cases  of sudden death satisfied  the diagnostic  criteria  for

coronary death except one "unexplained" sudden death; a
man was found dead sitting in a chair a few hours after his
wife had seen him apparently at ease.

There was a negative association between the percentage
change  in  serum cholesterol  and CHD incidence  in  the
intervention and control groups and for both together (table
VII). A simple t test for correlation in the pooled groups after
the  arcsine  square  root  of  rate-transformation  gives
r8 = - 0 - 73, p<0’  05, using deciles of change in serum choles-
terol.  There was also a negative correlation between CHD
incidence  and  percentage  change  in  cigarette  consump-
tion (table VIII). This was, however, weaker than that found
for serum cholesterol. The t test gives rg= -0’50, p>0-10,
based on deciles in the pooled groups.

TABLE IV-PRETREATMENT AND 4-YEAR DATA FROM MATCHED SUBGROUPS (SEE TABLE III FOR DIET DATA)

Good diet responders were selected from the intervention group. There were 23 men in each subgroup. Samples taken before the trial for HDL-cholesterol an3:n.:
were frozen for 4 years and the levels had dropped by 35%.
*p value for difference between mean 4-year value for the intervention subgroup and the control subgroup was <0’01.  1.

HDL-cholesterol x 100

Total cholesterol-HDL-cholesterol.

Cholesterol ratio  = 

ND =not done because the samples taken before the trial had been affected by freezing.

TABLE VII-CHD INCIDENCE BY QUINTILES OF CHANGE IN SERUM

CHOLESTEROL

1307

Fig. 2-Life table analysis of CHD (fatal and non-fatal myocardial
infarction and sudden death) in intervention and control groups.

Standardised estimated regression coefficients from Cox’s
proportional multivariate model are given in table IX for all
men and for those who smoked cigarettes at the start of the
trial. Only initial serum cholesterol levels and the change in
serum  cholesterol  were  significantly  correlated  with  the
incidence  of CHD in both groups and in the whole trial
population. The highest coefficient for change in cigarette
consumption was found for  the  cigarette  smokers  of the

TABLE V-CARDIOVASCULAR EVENTS

M][= median of quintile of intervention group; MC=median of quintile of
control group; My =median of qumtile for both groups together.

TABLE VIII-CHD INCIDENCE BY QUINTILES OF CHANGE IN CIGARETTE
CONSUMPTION IN MEN WHO SMOKED CIGARETTES AT THE START OF

THE TRIAL

*By two-tailed test.

TABLE VI-TOTAL MORTALITY

Mj= median of quintile of intervention group; MC=median of quintile of
control group; M-r=median of quintile for both groups together.

intervention group; a O-estimate of - 0 - 176 was calculated
but this was not significant (p>0 - 

Expected 0-values for the change factor were calculated

20).

from the Cox model using two approaches:

(i)  the Westlund score-table model (fig. 3)
(ii)  the empirical Oslo study relationship between CHD

incidence and risk factors. 5

The calculation  of expected  (3-values  is  based  on  the
assumption that a decline in risk-factor level is immediately
followed by a reduction in risk compatible with the models (i)
and (ii). More details are given elsewhere. 19 Table X presents
the  expected  standardised  regression  coefficients  and the
observed coefficients for the two models. Both models give

1308

TABLE IX-STANDARDISED REGRESSION COEFFICIENT FROM COX’S PROPORTIONAL HAZARDS MODEL AND THEIR ESTIMATED STANDARD

DEVIATIONS FOR 5 EXPLANATORY FACTORS IN INTERVENTION, CONTROL, AND POOLED GROUPS (ASSUMING COMMON UNDERLYING HAZARD

FUNCTION)

______________

NS=not significant.  Total,  n=1232 men; cigarette  smokers at  start,  n=977. (3=maximum likelihood  estimate of (3,  standardised regression coefficient;
S U estimated standard deviation.
SD(&bgr;) estimated standard deviation. 
values similar to the observed coefficient for the change in
serum cholesterol:  this  finding  is  compatible  with  the
hypothesis  that  there  is  an  immediate  and  predictable
reduction in risk as a result of reduction in the cholesterol
level.  For  change  in  cigarette  smoking  the  observed
coefficient was less than those predicted by the models: it is
possible that observational studies have overestimated the
decline in risk of CHD brought about by reducing cigarette
consumption.

To find out what proportion of the difference in total CHD
incidence between the two groups (36 versus 19 cases) is due
to the reduction in serum cholesterol and what proportion to
the reduction in cigarette consumption (adjusted for the other
factors) the following calculations were carried out.

We selected  an adjusted  coefficient  for  the  percentage
change in serum cholesterol in the cigarette smokers of the

Fig. 3-The Westlund score table model based on serum cholesterol
(chol), systolic blood pressure (SBP), and cigarette smoking (cig).

intervention group to assure conservative results with respect
to the lipid factor (&bgr; = - 0 - 535). Taking all other variables as
equal to their mean values, and using the common underlying
hazard function from the pooled groups, we calculated an
adjusted estimate of the partial probability of a CHD event
occurring on the basis of the percentage change in serum
cholesterol  only  for  each  man in  the  trial.  Adding the
estimates for the men in each group and taking the difference
as a percentage of the observed difference in CHD incidence
(17 cases) it  indicates the degree to which the cholesterol-
change factor (adjusted for the other factors) is responsible for
the decline in incidence.

The percentage due to cholesterol change was 60% for all
men, predicting a difference in CHD incidence of 10 I cases.
Likewise,  if  the  coefficient  for  percentage  change  in
cigarette smoking in the whole intervention group is  used
with  regard  to  reduction  in  cigarette  consumption
(=-0’176)  securing  the  most  optimistic  result,  the
percentage  of the  decline  in  incidence  that  was  due  to
reduction in cigarette consumption was 26% among smokers
only, predicting a difference between groups of 3.9 9 cases.

It  seems,  therefore,  that  the  change  in  cigarette
consumption causes, at most, 25% of the difference in CHD
incidence between the two groups, and that the difference is
due  mainly  to  the  reduction  in  serum  cholesterol.  The
difference  between  the  groups  was  17  cases:  14 can be
explained by this statistical approach. The other 3 cases may
be due to unexplained intervention effects or to chance.

Discussion

This study showed that informative advice can bring about
significant changes in serum lipid levels and smoking habits
in healthy, middle-aged men at high risk of CHD. and that
these changes are associated with a significant reduction in
the incidence of severe coronary disease.

These changes in life habits were achieved without the use
of drugs. There have been very few primary preventive trials
of CHD with randomised design. Dayton et al. carried out a
trial  mainly  in  individuals  without earlier  atherosclerotic
disease. However, the average age of the subjects was 65 years
at  the  start  of that  trial,  and  many  had  symptoms  of
atherosclerotic disease before the trial.  In addition, the diet
was different (high in polyunsaturated fatty acids), and the
mean serum cholesterol level at the beginning was only 233
mg/dl. The results, although not conclusive, indicated that
dietary prevention of CHD might be possible.

The Finnish mental hospital study’&deg;  suggested the same
conclusion but the design of that study has been criticised.
Leren’s study,8 a randomised diet trial in post-MI patients,
showed a significant effect of dietary changes on the rate of
recurrence of MI; the most beneficial effect in that study was
found  in  those  without  angina  and  with  normal  heart
volume-i.e.,  those who were most similar  to  subjects  of
primary prevention.

In  spite  of  these  promising  results,  the  "diet-heart
hypothesis" was still being questioned in 1972 when our trial
began. Since then there has been some criticism of the diet
recommendations  given  in  hyperlipidaemia,  and  for  the
population as a whole, in order to reduce coronary risk.20,’1
Our study differs from those mentioned above in that it is
based on healthy high-risk men with elevated total  serum
cholesterol; about 80% were habitual cigarette smokers. The
average age was lower than in earlier intervention studies, and
the age range was narrow (40-49 years).

Our study satisfied the criteria of an adequately controlled
trial, because all exclusions were made before randomisation.
None  of the  men who  had  symptom-free  "silent"  ST
depressions on exercise could be identified by us. The ECG
data have not yet been analysed and will be the subject of a
separate  report.  There is  no reason to  believe  that  ECG
changes  were not randomly distributed  between the  two-
groups.

The two risk factors influenced in this study were the eating
and smoking habits. Physical activity was not influenced, as
assessed by a questionnaire.  The men in the intervention
group were examined every 6 months and the control group
every 12 months. This might have introduced differences in
the subjective feelings of the men in the two groups. In such a
trial  it  is  impossible not to give the treated subjects more
attention than the controls. If a feeling of general attention
had  a  reassuring  effect,  the  more frequent  examinations
might favour the intervention group. On the other hand, the
more frequent medical contact  in  the  intervention  group
might have led to increased reporting of symptoms, and more
events  may have  been diagnosed.  We were  not  able  to
interview the control group as frequently as the intervention
group because of capacity problems. Towards the end of the
study, we sent a questionnaire about subjective feelings of
anxiety to all the men participating in the trial. To make them
be candid, answers were given anonymously, and 97 - 5% of
each group replied. 27 men in the intervention group and 9
men in the control group replied "yes" to the question "Did
the investigation create any anxiety?". 19 men in each group
answered "no" to the question "Did the investigation create
any feeling of safety?".

The dietary changes in the intervention group resulted in
pronounced falls in the levels of total serum cholesterol and
serum triglycerides and a slight weight reduction (mean 2 - 5
kg). Analysis of a subgroup showed an increase in the ratio of
HDL-cholesterol to LDL + VLDL-cholesterol.

1309

The criticism  that  the  diet  has  been investigated by a
weighing survey only in a small group of men could be made.
The 23 men from the intervention group were highly selected
and were not representative of the whole group. However,
this  analysis  shows  the  maximum  effect  that  our  diet
recommendations  can  have  on blood lipids.  The control
and intervention subgroups were closely matched, and the
diet in the controls compared well with earlier diet surveys in
Oslo.

In addition to receiving advice on changes in eating and
drinking habits, all smokers in the intervention group were
advised  to  stop  smoking.  According  to  the  smoking
questionnaire the mean tobacco consumption per man per
day in the intervention group decreased by almost a half.
There was also a small decrease in smoking in the controls.
When planning the sample size of the trial, we were aware
that because of the size of the groups, the risk level, and the
duration of the study,  the trial  would probably not show
significant  differences  in  total  mortality  between  the
intervention and control groups. According to the protocol,
the trial was planned only to show differences in major CHD
events (fatal and non-fatal MI and sudden coronary death).
Although  total  mortality  was  33%  lower  and  coronary
mortality 55% lower in the intervention group than in the
control group, the differences in mortality did not reach the
5% level of significance in a two-tailed test. However, it might
be valid to use a one-tailed test because the purpose of the
study was to see whether the intervention group would have a
lowered incidence of CHD. When a one-tailed test was used,
the  p values  were halved.  It  is  of interest  that  the  trend
observed for total and coronary mortality was similar to the
significant differences between the groups for combined fatal
and  non-fatal  CHD incidence.  The  lower  incidence  of
cardiovascular  events  in  the  intervention  group  was  not
counter-balanced  by  an  increased  incidence  of  non-
cardiovascular  disease-e.g.,  the  number of deaths  from
malignant disease was 5 in the intervention group and 8 in the
control group.

It is important to find out to what extent each of the two
factors  influenced  in  this  trial  was  responsible  for  the
observed difference in incidence. A multivariate statistical
model was used to separate the effects  of the two factors.
Changes in  serum cholesterol appeared to  correlate  more
closely with CHD incidence than did the change in cigarette
consumption.  The  statistical  model  predicted  that  the
changes in serum cholesterol accounted for about 60% of the
reduction in CHD incidence, whereas, most optimistically,
the cigarette factor accounted for only 25%. This apparently
disappointing  effect  of reduced cigarette  consumption is,
however, as expected according to model (ii) above. Although
a  substantial  reduction  in  cigarette  consumption  was
achieved during the trial, it  was not large enough to show a
significant reduction in risk; the statistical power of the trial
was too low. However, the calculations indicate that when
serum cholesterol is reduced, the risk of CHD declines within
the  study  period  as  far  as  could  be predicted  from the
regression between serum cholesterol and CHD incidence
found in several prospective population studies in Os10.35
The calculations show no such pronounced decline in risk as
a result of reduction of cigarette consumption.

The results of this multivariate analysis do not give such
convincing evidence as a monofactorial trial on each factor.
There has been only one randomised trial of the effects of
stopping smoking’3  and it  showed negative  results.  The
results of other studies might throw some doubt on a causal

1310

relation between smoking per se and atherosclerosis. In the
seven-country study22 there was no significant association
between  CHD incidence  and  smoking  in  the  different
countries, and in the prospective necropsy series of the Oslo
study  a  significant  correlation  between  prevalence  of
coronary raised atherosclerotic lesions and smoking could not
be shown.z3,z4

On the other hand it is possible that smoking intervention
might be effective only when tobacco consumption is reduced
to zero. This point may be relevant to our study, because most
of the participants reduced their consumption but did not
stop totally.

If this  had been a  diet  trial  only,  the difference  in  MI
incidence in the two groups would probably not have reached
statistical significance. However, the chosen design for the
study, which examines a combination of two important life-
style factors, demonstrates clearly the effects of intervention
and is also more relevant to usual medical practice.

Financial support from the City of Oslo and from the Norwegian Council of

Cardiovascular Diseases is gratefully acknowledged.

Correspondence should be addressed to Dr I.  Hjermann, The Oslo Study,

Medical Outpatient Clinic, Ullevaal Hospital, Oslo 1, Norway.

REFERENCES

1  Carlson L, Lindstedt S. The Stockholm prospective study. Acta Med Scand 1968;

Suppl. 493. 1-135.

2  Stamler J Epidemiology of coronary heart disease. Med Clin North Am 1973,57: 5-46.
3.  Westlund K, Nicolaysen  R.  Ten-year mortality  and morbidity  related  to  serum

cholesterol. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 1972; 30: (Suppl. 127): 1-24

4.  Wilhelmsen L, Wedel H, Tibblin G. Multivariate analysis of risk factors for coronary

heart disease. Circulation 1973; 48: 950-58

5  Holme I, Helgeland A, Hjermann I, Leren P, Lund-Larsen PG Four and two-thirds
years incidence of coronary heart disease in middle-aged men. The Oslo Study. Am J
Epidemiol 1980, 112: 149-60

6.  Reid DD, Hamilton PJS, McCartney P, Rose G. Smoking and other risk factors for

coronary heart disease in British civil servants  Lancet 1976; ii.  979-84

7  Pooling Project Research Group. Relationship of blood pressure, serum cholesterol,
smoking habits,  relative  weight and ECG abnormalities to  incidence of major
coronary events  Final  report  of the Pooling Project  J Chronic Dis  1978;  31:
201-306

8  Leren P. The effect of plasma cholesterol lowering diet in male survivors of myocardial

infarction. Acta Med Scand 1966;  Suppl. 466 1-92

9.  Dayton S, Pearce ML, Hashimoto S, Dixon WJ, Tomiyasn M A controlled clinical
trial of a diet high in unsaturated fat  Monograph no 25  New York: The American
Heart Association Inc., 1969.

10  Miettinen M, Turpeinen O,  Karvonen MJ, Elusuo R,  Paavalainen E  Effect  of
cholesterol-lowering diet on mortality from coronary heart disease and other causes:
a twelve-year clinical trial  in men and women Lancet 1972; ii  835-38.

11.  Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Group on Anti-hypertensive Agents.

Effects of treatment on morbidity in hypertension JAMA 1970, 213:  1143-52.

12.  McFate Smith W Treatment of mild hypertension  Results of a ten-year intervention

trial  Circ Res 1977; 40 (Suppl  1):  98-105.

13.  Rose G, Hamilton PJS A randomised controlled trial of the effect on middle aged men

of advice to stop smoking. J Epidemiol Commun Hlth 1978, 32: 275-81

14  Leren P, Askevold EM, Foss OP, et al. The Oslo study, cardiovascular disease in young

and middle aged Oslo men. Acta Med Scand 1975,  Suppl. 588. 1-38

15.  Foss OP. The Oslo Study The quantitative determination of cholesterol, triglycerides
and glucose in blood serum. Laboratory protocol no 2  Central laboratory, Ullevaal
hospital, Oslo, 1975; 1-92.

16.  Hjermann I.  Smoking and diet  intervention  in  healthy coronary high  risk  men
Methods and 5-year follow-up of risk factors in a randomised trial. The Oslo Study.
J Oslo City Hosp 1980, 30: 3-17.

17.  Hjermann I, Enger S Chr, Helgeland A, Holme I,  Leren P, Trygg K. The effect of
dietary changes on high density lipoprotein cholesterol. The Oslo study Am J Med
1979, 66:  105-09

18.  Kay R. Proportional hazards regression models and the analysis of censored survival

data Appl Statist 1977; 26: 227-37

19.  Holme I  On the separation of the effect of antismoking and lipidlowering diet on
incidence of acute myocardial infarction in high risk men. The Oslo study. J Oslo
City Hosp (m press).

20.  Ahrens EH  Dietary fat  and coronary heart  disease  unfinished  Lancet  1979;  ii:

1345-48.

21. Werk&oslash;  L. Diet, lipids and heart attacks. Acta Med Scand 1979; 206: 435-39
22.  Keys A. Coronary heart disease in seven countries. Monograph no 29 New York. The

American Heart Association Inc ,  1970.

23.  Holme I,  Enger S Chr, Helgeland A, et  al  Risk factors and raised atherosclerotic
lesions  in coronary and cerebral arteries  A statistical analysis.  The Oslo study
Arteriosclerosis 1981; 1:  250-56.

24.  Solberg LAa, Enger S Chr, Hjermann I,  et al  Risk factors for coronary and cerebral
atherosclerosis  in  the  Oslo  study.  In  Gotto AM, Smith LC, Allen  B,  eds
Proceedings of the  fifth  International  Symposium of Atherosclerosis,  Houston
Texas. New York, Heidelberg, Berlin- Springer-Verlag, 1980

TOWARDS AN IMPROVED LIPID-LOWERING
DIET: ADDITIVE EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN

NUTRIENT INTAKE

B. LEWIS
M. KATAN
I. MERKX

N. E. MILLER

F. HAMMETT

R. M. KAY
A. NOBELS
A. V. SWAN

Department of Chemical Pathology and Metabolic Disorders,
St Thomas’s Hospital, London; and the Department of Human
Nutrition, Agricultural University,  Wageningen, Netherlands; and
Department of Surgery, University of Toronto,  Toronto, Canada
Summary 

To identify diets that are more effective than
existing  ones  in  reducing  lipoprotein-
mediated risk of atherosclerotic heart disease, the serum lipid
and lipoprotein response to three modified diets was studied
in  twelve  normal  men  living  in  an  institution.  The
"Western" reference diet (40% energy from fat,  P/S ratio
0.27)  was compared in  Latin  square  design with  a  fat-
modified diet (diet B, 27% energy from fat, P/S 1&middot; 0, reduced
cholesterol content); with a fat-modified diet supplemented
with fruit, vegetable, and cereal fibre (diet C); and with a diet
providing 40% energy from fat,  having P/S ratio  1.0 and
supplemented  by  fibre  (diet  D).  The  effects  of  fat
modification and fibre-supplementation (diets C and D) were
strongly additive&mdash;a fall in serum cholesterol by 24-29%, in
low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol by 31-34%, and
in serum triglyceride by 21-26%; and the reduction, by diet
C,  of  the  ratio  of  serum  cholesterol  to  high-density-
lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol by 21%, and that of LDL-
cholesterol to HDL2-cholesterol by 26%. The additive effects
of multiple changes in  nutrient intake,  each moderate in
extent,  permits the design of diets  which are remarkably
effective in reducing serum-cholesterol level.

Introduction

THERE  is  now  much  evidence  that  a  raised  serum-
cholesterol concentration is a causal factor in atherosclerotic
heart disease (AHD),’-3 and a large body of data supports the
view that it is desirable to reduce cholesterol levels in AHD-
prone populations as  a  means of reducing risk  from this
disease.I,2,4  All  proposals  involve  changes  in  diet.2,H
Increased physical activity is usually recommended, and for
patients  with  major  primary  hyperlipidaemias  drug
treatment is  often indicated. Each method of controlling
hyperlipidaemia must be assessed for its efficacy, safety, cost,
and acceptability for long-term use.  Conventional dietary
management  of  hypercholesterolaemia  alone  (without
measures for reducing obesity) comprises restriction of intake
to 25-35% of dietary energy and reduction of cholesterol
intake to 150-250 mg per day. Most recommendations also
include  partial 
by
polyunsaturated fatty acids; recent guidelines propose a ratio
of polyunsaturated fatty acids to saturated fatty acids (PIS
ratio) of 1, though ratios ofl’ 5-2 were typical of earlier lipid-
lowering diets.

substitution  of  saturated 

fat 

The effects of dietary change on serum lipids is influenced
not only by the composition of the diet but also by individual
responsiveness,8 the type and genetic basis of the lipoprotein
abnormality, and compliance and palatability. The 8-16%
reductions in serum cholesterol achieved in clinical practice
and in large-scale trials6,7,9-11 are smaller than those achieved
in metabolic wards.

Many nutrients other than dietary lipids influence serum
levels.  Some  forms  of  dietary  fibre,
cholesterol 
predominantly those derived from fruit and vegetables, such

