Saturday 7 March 1992

No 8793

ORIGINAL ARTICLES

Effects on coronary artery disease of lipid-lowering
diet, or diet plus cholestyramine, in the St Thomas’

Atherosclerosis Regression Study (STARS)

on 

concentrations 

To assess the effect of dietary reduction of plasma
cholesterol 
coronary
atherosclerosis, we set up a randomised, controlled,
end-point-blinded trial based on quantitative image
analysis  of coronary angiograms in  patients  with
angina  or  past  myocardial  infarction.  Another
intervention group received diet and cholestyramine,
to  determine the effect  of  a  greater  reduction  in
circulating cholesterol concentrations.

90 men with coronary heart disease (CHD), who
had a mean (SD) plasma cholesterol of 7&middot;23  (0&middot;77)
mmol/l were randomised to receive usual care (U,
controls),  dietary  intervention  (D),  or  diet  plus
cholestyramine (DC), with angiography at baseline
and  at  39  (SD  3&middot;5)  months.  Mean  plasma
cholesterol during the trial period was 6&middot;93  (U), 6&middot;17
(D),  and  5&middot;56  (DC)  mmol/l.  The  proportion  of
patients  who  showed  overall  progression  of
coronary  narrowing  was significantly  reduced by
both  interventions  (U  46%,  D  15%,  DC 12%),
whereas the proportion who showed an increase in
luminal diameter rose significantly (U 4%, D 38%, DC
33%). The mean absolute width of the coronary
segments (MAWS) studied decreased by 0&middot;201  mm
in controls, increased by 0&middot;003  mm in group D, and
increased by 0&middot;103 mm in group DC (p<0&middot;05),  with
improvement also seen  in  the  minimum width of
segments, percentage diameter stenosis, and edge-
irregularity index in intervention groups. The change
in  MAWS was  independently  and  significantly
correlated  with  LDL  cholesterol  concentration
and  LDL/HDL cholesterol  ratio  during  the  trial
period. 
significantly
reduced  the  frequency  of  total  cardiovascular
events.

interventions 

Both 

Dietary change alone retarded overall progression
and increased overall regression of coronary artery
disease,  and  diet  plus  cholestyramine  was

additionally  associated  with  a  net  increase  in
coronary lumen diameter. These findings support the
use of  a  lipid-lowering  diet,  and if  necessary of
appropriate drug treatment, in men with CHD who
have  even  mildly  raised  serum  cholesterol
concentrations.

Introduction

Diet is  the main environmental determinant of plasma
lipid concentrations, and dietary modification is recognised
to be the first line of treatment for hyperlipidaemia.1 We
have  previously  reported  angiographic  evidence  that
treatment of hyperlipidaemia by diet and medication retards
progression  of  symptomatic  atherosclerosis  in  femoral
arteries.2  Several  trials  have shown that  treatment with
lipid-lowering drugs may lead to regression of coronary
atherosclerosis.  That dietary  modification  may have  a
similar effect is supported by an uncontrolled trial by a trial
in which diet was used as one of five interventions,4 and by
findings in a diet-treated placebo group.s

The St Thomas’ Atheroma Regression Study (STARS)
was designed to  assess the effects of a practicable lipid-
lowering  diet  on the  coronary arteries  of patients  with
coronary  heart  disease  (CHD) by computerised  image
analysis of paired coronary angiograms at  an interval  of
about 3 years. A second intervention group followed the diet
and received the lipid-lowering drug cholestyramine,l to
observe  the  effects  of  a  greater  reduction  in  plasma
cholesterol concentration.

ADDRESSES:  Department  of  Endocrinology  and  Chemical
Pathology (G  F. Watts, DM), Rayne Institute (Prof B. Lewis, MD,
E. S Lewis, BA), Department of Cardiology (D. J. Coltart, FRCP, L. D.
R. Smith, MRCP), and Department of Public Health Medicine (A. V.
Swan, PhD), UMDS, St Thomas’ Hospital, London; Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Manchester Medical School,
Manchester, UK (J. N H. Brunt, PhD); and Department of Human
Nutrition, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand (Prof J I
Mann,  MD).  Correspondence  to  Dr  G.  F  Watts,  Department  of
Endocrinology and Chemical Pathology, St Thomas’ Hospital, Lambeth
Palace Road, London SE1 7EH, UK.

564

Patients

Patients and methods

TABLE I-CLINICAL AND DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS

I 

I

Men referred for  coronary angiography to investigate angina
pectoris or other findings suggestive of CHD were eligible for entry
to the study if they were under 66 years of age and had plasma
cholesterol concentrations above 60 mmol/1 in two consecutive
blood samples while on their usual diet. This cut-off value was set to
obtain widely generalisable results; in a study of British men with
CHD, mean plasma cholesterol was 6-9 mmol/1.*’ Patients with
plasma cholesterol concentrations above 10 mmol/1 were excluded
to  avoid  inappropriate  randomisation  of patients  with  severe
hypercholesterolaemia to a control group, as were patients already
treated with lipid-lowering drugs.

Predetermined  grounds  for  exclusion  were  fasting  plasma
triglyceride  concentrations  above  4  mmot/1  or  remnant
hyperlipidaemia  (both  might  be  adversely  affected  by
cholestyramine), fasting glucose above 7 mmol/1, cardiac failure,
myocardial infarction in the previous 8 weeks, malignancy, other
major organ disease, or accelerated hypertension. Patients were also
excluded if initial angiographic or clinical findings indicated a need
for coronary artery revascularisation or if they had undergone such a
procedure.  Patients  in  the  study  who subsequently  required
single-vessel  or  double-vessel  bypass  grafts  or  single-vessel
angioplasty  were included in the analysis  but the angiographic
appearance of the grafts,  grafted  arteries,  or  arteries  that  had
undergone angioplasty were not used for comparison of outcome.
The nature and purpose of the trial were described to patients
during the initial admission for angiography and a fasting blood
sample was obtained  on the morning after  admission.  Eligible
patients were seen again twice for repeat fasting blood samples, and
at the second of these visits the trial was again described and written
consent  obtained.  Patients  thought  unable  to  understand  the
implications  of the  trial  design  were  excluded.  The research
protocol was approved by the St Thomas’ Hospital and Central
Oxford ethics committees.

All  eligible  patients  then  underwent  a  short  trial  of
cholestyramine  to  identify  those  who responded  to  and  were
tolerant of the drug. 8 g cholestyramine twice daily was prescribed
for  14 days, after which patients reattended for a fasting blood
sample.  Patients  were included in the study if they agreed to
continue cholestyramine at the same dosage for 3 years should they
be randomised into the appropriate group and if plasma cholesterol
had fallen by more than 0-5 mmol/1 on cholestyramine alone. At this
visit eligible patients were randomly assigned to one of three groups:
a lipid-lowering diet (group D); diet plus cholestyramine (DC); and
usual care only (U).

Interventions

In the lipid-lowering diet, which has been used in the St Thomas’
Hospital lipid clinic since 1982, total fat intake was reduced to 27%
of dietary energy, saturated fatty acid content to 8-10% of dietary
energy, and dietary cholesterol to 100 mg/1000 kcal; omega-6 and
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty  acids  were increased  to  8% of
dietary  energy,  and plant-derived  soluble  fibre  (chiefly pectin)
intake was increased to the equivalent of 3-6 g polygalacturonate/
1000 kcal. Intake of alcohol was permitted at the patient’s habitual
level. Patients in groups D and DC were instructed by a dietitian
after  a  detailed  history  was  obtained  as  a  guide  to  energy
requirements; choice of food was adapted to individual preferences.
For patients with a body mass index (BMI) below 25 kg/m2 an
isocaloric diet was prescribed; overweight patients were prescribed
a diet that contained 1000-1200 kcal daily to achieve a BMI of
25 kgjm2. Further dietetic counselling and, if requested, suitable
foodstuffs,  were given to  participants  in  the  diet  or diet  plus
cholestyramine groups who did not achieve or maintain serum
cholesterol  reductions  of 15%  or  25%, respectively.  At each
follow-up visit the clinician inquired about dietary compliance and
provided encouragement.

Group DC received similar dietetic  advice together with 8 g
cholestyramine  twice  daily  with  meals.  Unused sachets  were
counted at follow-up visits; mean (SD) daily intake was assessed at
14 (24) g.

Mean  (SEM)  values  shown for  continuous vanables  U=usual care,  D=diet,
DC = diet 
disease,
M 1= myocardial infarction

plus  cholestyramme  groups;  CHD=coronary  heart 

The control group received, in common with both intervention
groups,  cardiological  supervision  and  treatment,  repeated
counselling against smoking, and antihypertensive treatment if
appropriate. All participants were advised about a suitable level of
daily exercise.  Patients in the control group with a BMI above
25 kgjm2 were advised to lose weight but did not receive formal
dietary counselling.

Follow-up

Patients  were seen at intervals of about 3 months for clinical
assessment,  fasting  venous  blood  samples,  analysis  and
encouragement of compliance with treatment, and further dietary
counselling  where  appropriate.  Supine  blood  pressure  was
measured with a standard sphygmomanometer after 5 min and
mean arterial  blood pressure calculated as  diastolic pressure (at
Korotkov phase 5) plus 3 purse pressure. Angina was assessed as
number of episodes per week, duration in min, severity on a scale of
1  to 7 (7 worst), and by Canadian Heart Association functional
clasps.7 Changes in medication were recorded. Patients underwent
repeat  angiography approximately  3  years  after  randomisation
(mean [SD] 39 [3’5] months).

Coronary angiography and image analysis

We used the Judkins percutaneous femoral artery technique for
coronary angiography, without routine use of vasodilators, and with
almost exclusive use of ’Cordis’ 8 F catheters (Miami, Florida,
USA). 4 views of the right and 7 of the left coronary artery were
routinely recorded on 35 mm cine-film at 60 frames/s by use of a
caesium iodide intensifier  with a  1  cm2 grid for  correction of
pincushion  distortion.  Viewing  angles,  table  height,  and  the
sequence of views were recorded and reproduced as exactly as
possible, by the same cardiologist, at repeat angiography.

Coronary artery segments 1-3, 5-8, and 11-138 were analysed if
there was a clear unobstructed view, and the segment was oriented
in the image plane and clearly seen in at least 2 different views.
Paired, coded films were compared on a twin-channel projector and
paired frames of the same view at end-diastole were photographed;
the photographs were coded, and marked to identify the segments
for image analysis. Coding was done by an investigator who was
aware: of the film sequence but blinded to the therapeutic group;
comparison of the coded films and image analysis were done by
investigators blinded to the sequence and therapeutic group of the
angiograms and photographs.

Selected  cine-frames  were  digitised  at  high  resolution
(1024 x 1024 pixels, 8-bit grey scale) by use of a ’Videk Megaplus’
CCD array camera (Eastman Kodak, Rochester, New York, USA),
and stored on optical disc.  Usually 4 projections were stored to
ensure adequate views of as many arterial segments as possible.
Edges of segments and of the catheter were delineated by computer

TABLE Plasma LIPIDS AND LIPOPROTEINS AT BASELINE AND DURING TRIAL

I  I

565

Mean (SEM) values shown; within-group comparisons by paired t-test. U =usual care, D=diet, DC = diet plus cholestyramine groups

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I

according to the methods of Brunt and colleagues,9-11 and for each
paired projection this process was usually repeated in three adjacent
frames to improve precision; all detected edge-points were stored on
disc.  From these  stored edge-points,  corrected  for  pincushion
distortion from the intensifier system, the mean width along each
segment, expressed in pixels, was computed. Mean absolute width
of the segment (MAWS) and minimum absolute width of each
segment (MinAWS), expressed  in  mm, were  calculated  from
catheter dimensions obtained by micrometry.

Measures of outcome

Change in MAWS was the principal end-point measure, and an
indication of overall change in coronary atherosclerosis for each
patient was given as an overall MAWS change, averaged from all
changes obtained from the measurable segments. The definition of
disease progression and regression for patients and for individual
segments took into account the imprecision (2 SD, calculated from
the  variability  of  repeated  analysis  of  arterial  segments)  of
measurement of the change in  MAWS; overall  and segmental
progression was thus defmed as a change exceeding -0-17 mm and
-0-24 mm, respectively,  and regression  as  change exceeding
+0-17 mm and  +0-24 mm diameter, respectively.  Secondary
angiographic  end-points  were the  change in  MinAWS (mm),
percentage  diameter stenosis,12  and the  edge-irregularity  index
(%).13  Because  totally  occluded  segments  could  not  undergo
edge-detection,  and  overall  assessment  would  be  seriously
incomplete without taking them into account, we also defined a
"functional" segmental width which would be zero if blood did not
reach  that  segment because  of occlusion  of a  more proximal
segment.  These and other approaches to  quantitative coronary
angiography have been reviewed.l’

Clinical end-points recorded were deaths (by cause), non-fatal
myocardial  infarction,  coronary  artery  bypass  surgery  or
angioplasty during the trial, stroke, frequency and degree of angina,
and change in anti-anginal medication.

Laboratory investigations included fasting (12 h) plasma lipid
and lipoprotein concentrations at  each clinic visit,  with plasma
separated  immediately  and  analysis  started  the  same  day.
Cholesterol  and  triglyceride  concentrations  were  measured
enzymatically,  with mean interassay  coefficients  of variation of
2-8% at 3-0 mmol/1 and 3-4% at 7-6 mmoljl for cholesterol; and
3-0% at 1-8 mmol/1 and 2-8% at 3-0 mmol/1 for triglyceride. High
density lipoprotein (HDL) was isolated by precipitation of very low
density  (VLDL)  and  low  density  lipoproteins  (LDL)  with
heparin-manganese chloride;  excess manganese was chelated by
sodium-edetic acid before cholesterol assay. LDL cholesterol was
derived by the Friedewald formula. Haematocrit, liver and thyroid
function, and glucose and creatinine concentrations were measured
at baseline and 6-monthly thereafter.

TABLE III-BASELINE ANGIOGRAPHIC DATA

Mean (SEM) values shown for continuous vanables  Ell = edge-Irregulanty mdex;
U= usual care, D=diet, and DC= diet plus cholestyramme groups

! 

I 

I

Statistical methods

Changes  in  plasma  lipids  and  lipoproteins,  weight,  blood
pressure, and smoking were examined by the paired  Student’s
t-test. One-way analysis of variance and the unpaired t-test were
used to compare group differences  in the changes of MAWS,
MinAWS, percentage  diameter  stenosis,  and edge-irregularity
index by patient (overall score) and by segment. The influence of
group differences in baseline variables on differences of changes in
MAWS was studied by analysis of covariance. Differences in the
proportion of patients and segments that showed progression or
regression were compared by the X2 and Fisher’s exact tests. Group
differences  in  the  proportion of patients  with  definite  clinical
end-points were also compared by Fisher’s exact test.  Baseline,
in-trial, and changes in recorded variables associated with changes
in MAWS were identified by stepwise multiple linear regression.
Finally,  a multivariable linear  equation  was derived to  predict
MAWS changes by model-fitting analysis of variables that were not
co-correlated and achieved a significance of p <  0’ 1 in univariate
regression.

Results

90 patients were randomised, of whom 74 completed the
study with paired angiograms suitable for analysis at a mean
(SD) interval of 39 (3-5) months. 4 patients died suddenly;
10 withdrew voluntarily after a mean of 6 months because of
unwillingness  to  undergo  a  second  angiogram  (2),
intolerance  to  cholestyramine  (3),  emigration  (2),  or
neuropsychiatric disturbance (2); 1 had a minor stroke after
24  months  and  was  withdrawn;  and  2  had  only  one
angiogram available for analysis.

Table  I  shows  the  demographic  and  clinical
characteristics of the patients. There were no statistically
significant differences in the characteristics shown between
patients who completed or did not complete the study, nor
between the treatment groups.

Weight and blood pressure measurements were similar
among the treatment groups before and during the study.
Cigarette  use tended to  decrease but within-group and
between-group differences were not statistically significant.

Plasma lipids and lipoproteins

Table  11  shows  plasma  lipid  and  lipoprotein
concentrations and lipoprotein ratios by treatment group.
There were no significant group differences at outset with

TABLE IV-ANGIOGRAPHIC CHANGES BY PATIENT

I I I I
*By analysis of vanance.
tp = 0 06, tp < 
MAWS = mean absolute width of segment, MmAWS=mirnmum absolute width of
segment, % DS=percentage diameter stenosis;  EU=edge-irregu)ar!ty index; and
U=usual care, D=diet,and DC= diet plus cholestyramine groups.

0-05, &sect;p < 0.001, 11 p < 0 01 

vs usual care group

566

TABLE V-ANGIOGRAPHIC CHANGES BY SEGMENT

I 

I 

- 

I

llB’lo) 

I 

Z-V t)- 1) 

I 

- wyJll 1 

I 

-o-r l-oJ-,

Mean (SEM) values shown. BS = baseline stenosis, other abbreviations as for table IV.
*By analysis of vanance
tp 00001, &Dagger;p<  0001, &sect;p < 0 005, yp<0  01, &par;p <0  05, **p=0 06, and ttp = 0-08 vs usual care group by unpaired t-test.

respect  to  plasma  cholesterol,  LDL cholesterol,  HDL
cholesterol, triglyceride, cholesterol/HDL cholesterol ratio,
or HDL/LDL cholesterol ratio. In group U the mean values
were very stable during the study. In group D there were
falls  in  plasma  cholesterol  (14-2%),  LDL cholesterol
(16-2%),  triglyceride  (20%),  plasma  cholesterol/HDL
cholesterol ratio (156%), and LDL/HDL ratio (17-6%). In
group DC the falls in cholesterol (25-3%), LDL cholesterol
(35-7%), cholesterol/HDL cholesterol ratio (24-1%), and
LDL/HDL cholesterol  ratio  (34-6%) were greater than
those observed in group D, but there was no significant
reduction  in  triglyceride.  Plasma  HDL  cholesterol
concentration  did  not  alter  significantly  in  groups  D
or DC.

Angiographic findings

differences  between  groups). 

Paired measurements were made on 489 segments, with a
mean (SD) of 6-4 (2-0) segments analysed per patient (no
significant 
Baseline
angiographic data by treatment group are given in table ni.
Because the three patients in group U who died had severe
CHD at entry, mean baseline values for diameter stenosis
and edge-irregularity index in the surviving patients were
lowest in this group, however, between-group differences
are not statistically significant. Total numbers of occluded
segments,  patients  with  occlusions,  and  mean ejection
fractions, were similar between groups.

Table  iv  shows  the  mean within-patient  changes  in
quantitative  estimates  of  coronary  artery  disease  by
treatment group. MAWS fell by 0-201 mm in group U, but
increased by 0-003 mm in group D, and increased by 0 103
for trend); 95% confidence
mm in group DC (p<0-012 
intervals  for  mean  differences  between  groups  were
- 0424,0016mm(UvsD)and -0-470, -0.139mm(Us
DC).  Similar  trends  were seen  with other  measures of
angiographic  change  (table  IV).  Group  differences  in
outcome  measures  were  not  significantly  affected  by

differences  in  baseline  variables.  Assessment  of  the
distribution  of results,  in which the few extreme values
recorded  were  excluded,  showed  similar  differences
between treatment groups but the reduced variation led to
smaller p values such that group differences were significant
for all outcome measures.

Overall progression was observed in 11 patients (46%) in
group U, 4 (15%) in group D, and 3 (12%) in group DC
for trend, X2 test).  Regression of atherosclerosis
(p < 0-02 
occurred in 1 patient (4%) in group U, 10 patients (38%) in
for trend).
group D, and 8 (33%) in group DC (p < 0-02 
Ejection fraction did not alter significantly in any of the
groups. The mean interval (SD) between paired angiograms
was not significantly different between groups: U 40-0 (4’5),
D 38-1 (3-5), and DC 38-9 (2-8) months.

The effects of treatment by segment are shown in table v,
grouped for  all  segments,  all  patent  segments,  and by
baseline  severity  of disease  (minimal,  <  15% diameter
stenosis; moderate, 15-50% diameter stenosis; and severe,
stenosis).  All  angiographic  criteria  consistently
> 50% 
worsened in group U and consistently improved in groups
D and DC for all segments and for all segments patent at
outset, with significant trends across all treatment groups.
Segments with minimal, moderate, and severe baseline
stenosis all showed favourable trends in both intervention
groups, but deterioration in the usual care group (table v).

TABLE VI-CARDIOVASCULAR EVENTS

*Only excludes patients who withdrew
tp <  0 05, tp <  0 01  vs usual care group by Fisher’s exact test

I 

I

TABLE ]VII-CORRELATIONS BETWEEN CHANGE IN MAWS AND
CHANGES FROM BASELINE OR MEAN IN-TRIAL PLASMA LIPID

AND LIPOPROTEIN

1B,,---  :-  ...._:_1

Pooled data, n = 74

The most striking changes in diameter stenosis were seen in
the worst affected segments.

Among controls 34% of segments showed progression,
significantly  more  (p < 0-01 
for  trend)  than  in  both
intervention  groups (group D, 22%; group DC, 17%).
More segments showed regression in groups D and DC
than  in  controls,  but  the  trend  was  not  significant.  5
segments became occluded in group U, 3 in group D, and 0
in  group  DC (p<0-09 vs 
UC);  1  occluded  segment
recanalised during the study, in group DC.

Clinical events

14 patients had clinical cardiovascular events as shown in

table VI, 10 of whom were controls (p < 0-05  vs diet, p < 0-01
vs diet plus cholestyramine). All deaths were sudden and
were not caused by trauma or non-cardiovascular disease.
Angina symptoms were not significantly changed among
controls,  whereas  both  intervention  groups  showed
significant improvements (p <  0-01)  in severity of angina
and CHA functional score. The change in weekly frequency
of angina  was  correlated  with  the  change  in  MAWS
(r = 0-31, p=0008).

During the  study  &bgr;-blockers  were used by 35 %  of
patients,  calcium  antagonists  by 34%, long-acting  oral
nitrates by 24%, diuretics by 19%, aspirin by 18%, and
dipyridamole by 13%. The proportion of patients taking
these drugs did not differ significantly among treatment
groups. 10 controls (42%) required increased anti-anginal
treatment compared with 5 (19%) in group D and 6 (25%)
in group DC. There was no significant correlation between
change in medication and change in MAWS.

1  nn

Fig 1-Correlation of mean absolute width of segment (by
patient) and mean plasma LDL cholesterol concentration
during trial.
&Dgr;MAWS=0.58-0.15x LDL, r= -0-40; p<0  001.
&dtrif; = control, &bullet;  = diet; 0 = diet plus cholestyramme.

567

Plasma LDL/HDL cholesterol ratio 

v

Fig  2-Correlation of  mean absolute width of segment (by

patient) and in-tri&agrave;l  LDL/HDL cholesterol ratio.
AMAWS == 0 48-014x X LDL/HDL, r=-0.42, p<0’001.
Symbols as for fig 1.

Correlations with change in MA WS

Of baseline variables, only percentage diameter stenosis
was  significantly  correlated  with  change  in  MAWS
(r = 0-28, p = 0-016; by patient); it was also associated with
change  in  MinAWS  (r=0’36,  p<001), 
change  in
percentage diameter stenosis  (r=-0&deg;55,  p<0&deg;001), 
and
change in edge-irregularity index (r = - 0-50, p < 0-001).
Mean lipid and lipoprotein concentrations during the trial
were more strongly correlated with the change in MAWS
than were the changes from baseline (table VII); strongest
correlations were seen with mean LDL cholesterol (fig 1)
and LDL/HDL cholesterol ratio (fig 2). Associations were
also observed between the change in MAWS and in mean
arterial  blood pressure (r=0’24, p = 0-04) and treatment
group (r = - 0-34, p = 0-003), but the change in MAWS was
independent  of  treatment  group  if  the  in-trial  LDL
cholesterol  concentration  or  LDL/HDL cholesterol  ratio
were taken into  account. No significant  correlations  were
found with age, BMI, current smoking or change in smoking
habits,  alcohol consumption, personality  type,  systolic  or
diastolic blood pressures, or use of anti-anginal drugs.

The  best  multilinear  regression  model  to  estimate
change in MAWS included change in mean arterial blood
pressure (MBP) and the mean LDL/HDL cholesterol ratio
during the trial  (&Dgr;MAWS =0.015  x  AMBP-0-145  x
LDL/HDL + 0 47, r = 0 50, p < 0 0001).

Discussion

As in  other trials  of lipid  lowering  in  atherosclerotic
femoral2,15 and coronary3,4,16-19 artery disease, the STARS
trial used as an end-point arteriographic assessment of the
arterial  lumen, which may not necessarily  equate with
progression  and regression  of atherosclerosis.  However,
comparison with the  effects  of lipid-lowering studies  in
animals2O-22 suggests that such trials in man at least partly
reflect  favourable  effects  on  the  natural  history  of
atherosclerosis. Lysis of arterial thrombus might contribute
to luminal widening, but persistent angiographic changes at
an average interval of 39 months would be unlikely; we have
no reason to suspect that controls had more thrombi at
presentation than the intervention groups. Experimental
hypercholesterolaemia 
impairs  endothelium-mediated
vasodilator  responses,23,24  which  in  animals  are  partly
restored by a low-fat diet.25 Such an effect could contribute
to  luminal widening  seen  in  "regression"  studies.  The

568

consistent  associations  observed  between  arteriographic
improvement and clinical end-points also suggest that such
measurements are related to cardiac prognosis.17,18 However,
macroscopic evidence of regression of atherosclerosis in man
is limited to necropsy series which show fewer arterial lesions
during  wartime  nutritional 
less
consistently, among patients who die from cancer.27

deprivation26 

or, 

In this study of men with CHD, coronary atherosclerosis,
and mild-to-moderate hypercholesterolaemia, almost half
(46%) the controls, who received usual medical treatment,
showed progressive coronary narrowing and only 1  (4%)
showed luminal widening. By contrast, subjects advised to
follow  a  lipid-lowering  diet,  and  those  on  diet  and
cholestyramine,  showed a  66% fall  in  the  incidence of
progression, a 10-fold increase in the frequency of luminal
widening, and fewer cardiac events; patients in the diet plus
cholestyramine  group  also  showed  widening  of  mean
coronary diameter and of stenoses, compared with controls.
Other investigators  have studied the effects  of lipid-
lowering diets  on coronary disease.  In the Leiden trial,3
which was not controlled, a vegetarian diet with a very high
ratio of polyunsaturated fat to saturated fat was employed
and favourable coronary angiographic changes correlated
with the fall  in  serum cholesterol and the rise  in HDL
cholesterol. In the Lifestyle Heart Trial,4 a restrictive diet
(<  10% energy from fat)  was employed as  one of five
interventions; a favourable effect on coronary stenoses was
observed,  but the  investigators  did  not  claim  that  this
regimen was practicable. The lipid-lowering diet used in our
trial was readily accepted and has been successfully used for
a  decade.28,29  With  careful  dietary  counselling  and
motivation, most patients in the STARS study complied
quite well with the diet for over 3 years and it thus represents
the first randomised, controlled trial  of moderate dietary
change  as  a  unifactorial  intervention  in  patients  with
coronary  atherosclerosis.  A second  intervention  group
received dietary advice plus cholestyramine to investigate
the  effect  of  a  further  reduction  of  LDL cholesterol.
Cholestyramine reduces the incidence30 and progression31 of
CHD, has a good safety record, is well tolerated in modest
dosage, and is  still  recommended for drug treatment of
hypercholesterolaemia.1 We found diet plus cholestyramine
to be more effective than diet alone, except in patients with
stenosis at outset, and led to a greater degree of
> 50% 
regression of coronary artery disease. Other trials based on
coronary  angiography  have  also  shown  a  consistently
favourable effect of more intensive lipid-lowering treatment
on coronary artery stenoses.4,16-19

Analysis of up to 10 coronary artery segments, provided
that they were clearly seen, allowed examination of relatively
normal coronary arteries  with less  than  15 %  stenosis  at
outset, of segments affected by moderate stenoses, and of
severely stenosed segments. As with other lipid-lowering
trials,16,18 the most favourable effects tended to be seen in the
segments or stenoses which were most severely affected.
The plaques most likely to cause acute coronary events are
lipid-rich lesions of moderate size associated on average with
30-40% stenosis;32,33 we observed significant regression or
reduction in  progression in  such segments.  Results  are
presented by patient (a measure of overall trend18 which is
comparable to visual overall assessment of angiograms16)
and by segment, which greatly increases the number of
observations and permits separate assessment of effects on
lesions of different initial severity. Segment-specific analysis
is based on the absolute width of coronary segments3 rather
than  percentage  stenosis  alone,  because  the  latter

measurement assumes normality of the adjacent segment.
When segment  diameters  were  treated  as  continuous
variables  rather  than  categorical  ones  (progression  or
regression alone), change in diameter was found to be related
to mean LDL cholesterol concentration during the trial.
The correlation was modest (r = &mdash; 0-40), as found in other
trials,16,18,19 but highly significant (p <  0-001). The lower the
LDL cholesterol  concentration,  the  more striking  the
regression  of coronary atherosclerosis.  Accordingly, the
lower LDL cholesterol concentrations achieved by diet plus
cholestyramine, compared with diet alone, were associated
with  a  greater  increase  in  coronary  artery  diameter.
However, patient-specific analysis showed no difference in
the incidence of progression and regression between the two
interventions-which may reflect  a greater sensitivity of
segment-specific  analysis  or  a  greater  degree  of
improvement in vessel diameter in those patients in the DC
group who also showed an overall improvement.

Most,  though  not  all,  workers  believe  cholesterol
lowering to be justified in patients with CHD, and a recent
meta-analysis  of  lipid-lowering  trials  for  secondary
prevention indicates  a  substantial  and highly significant
reduction  of  further  coronary  events.34  Studies  of
atherosclerosis regression,  such as  STARS, complement
trials  based  on  clinical  end-points  and  show  that
improvement  in  angiographic  appearance,  or  arrest  of
progression, may be expected in many patients who receive
dietary advice and/or lipid-lowering drugs. Although the
changes achieved in  coronary diameter or in percentage
stenosis are small the haemodynamic effects, particularly for
tight stenoses, may be more substantial; moreover, trends
seen during the 1-5 years’ follow-up of most trials may be
continued with more prolonged therapy. Although several
regression  trials  have  shown  improved  angiographic
appearances, these have been achieved at widely different
mean LDL cholesterol concentrations of 2-46 mmol/1" to
4-45 mmol/1.19 In this study, the regression line in fig  1
suggests a tendency to improvement when LDL cholesterol
was below 3-0-3-5 mmol/1. However, the results achieved at
various mean cholesterol  concentrations in various trials
might also indicate that the extent of reduction in LDL
cholesterol  may  be  as  important  as  the  absolute
concentration attained. In this study we observed a closer
correlation  between  mean  in-trial  LDL  cholesterol
concentrations and change in MAWS than between the fall
in LDL cholesterol and change in MAWS (table vil).

atherosclerosis 

The findings of the STARS trial show that lipid-lowering
dietary intervention is indicated in men with symptomatic
and  plasma  cholesterol
coronary 
concentrations  above  6  mmol/l,  provided  that  their
prognosis is not severely limited by myocardial damage or
other  disease;  this  benefit  may be  increased by lipid-
lowering drugs. We believe that there is growing evidence to
support the use of lipid-lowering intervention, first by diet
but with drug treatment added if necessary, in men and
women with  CHD, irrespective  of plasma  cholesterol
concentration. Because of the high absolute risk of further
CHD in such patients, and the fact that they are already
under medical supervision, secondary prevention by risk
factor reduction is a particularly cost-effective approach to
the management of CHD .34

We thank Dr B. M. Slavin, Dr C. Forfar, Dr R. Wray, Dr J. Quiney, Dr
M. Ball, Dr C. Cortese, Dr J. N. Mount, Dr P. R. Turner, Ms C. Iles, Ms
P. Jackson, Mrs J.  Thompson, Mrs J. Porteus, Ms S. Mandalia, and Mr
W. Jefferson for their assistance, and Unilever plc, the Chemical Pathology
Fund of St Thomas’ Hospital, and Bristol-Myers Ltd for fmancial support.

REFERENCES

1. Study  Group.  The  treatment  of  hyperlipidaemia  in  adults.
Recommendations of the European Atherosclerosis Society. Eur Heart
J 1988; 8: 277-306.

2. Duffield RGM, Lewis B, Miller NE, Jamieson  CW, Brunt JNH,
Colchester ACF. Treatment of hyperlipidaemia retards progression of
symptomatic femoral atherosclerosis. Lancet 1983; ii: 639-42.

3. Amtzenius AC, Kromhout D, Barth JD, et al. Diet, lipoproteins, and the
progression of coronary atherosclerosis.  N Engl J Med 1985; 312:
805-11.

4. Ornish D, Brown SE, Scherwitz LW, et al. Can lifestyle changes reverse

coronary heart disease? Lancet 1990; 336: 129-33.

5. Blankenhom DH, Johnson RL, Mack WJ, El Zeim HA, Vailas LI. The
influence of diet on the appearance of new lesions in human coronary
arteries. JAMA 1990; 263: 1646-52.

6. Lewis B, Chait A, Oakley CM, et al. Serum lipoprotein abnormalities in
patients with ischaemic heart  disease:  comparisons with  a control
population. Br Med J 1974; iii: 489-93.

7. Campeau L. Grading of angina pectoris. Circulation 1976; 54: 522-23.
8. Austen WG, Edwards JE, Frye RI, et al.  AHA committee report. A
reporting system on patients evaluated for coronary artery disease.
Circulation 1975; 51: 7-40.

9. Colchester ACF, Brunt JNH. Measurement of vessel calibre and volume
blood flow by dynamic quantitative digital  angiography:  an initial
application showing variation of cerebral artery diameter with PaCO2.
J Cerebr Blood Flow Metab 1983; 3: S640-41.

10. Astley SM, Brunt JNH. Exploitation of computer vision technology in
coronary cineangiographic analysis.  (Computers in cardiology,  13.)
Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society Press, 1987: 579-82.

11. Brunt JNH. Design, implementation, validation and use of a system for
cineangiography.  Third  international
quantitative 
symposium on coronary arteriography (Rotterdam, 1989): 32 (abstr).
12. Brown BG, Bolson EL, Dodge HT. Arteriographic  assessment  of

coronary 

coronary atherosclerosis. Arteriosclerosis 1982; 2: 2-15.

13. Crawford DW, Brooks SH, Selzer RH, Barndt R, Beckenbach ES,
Blankenhom  DH.  Computer  densitometry  for  angiographic
assessment of arterial cholesterol content and gross pathology in human
atherosclerosis. J Lab Clin Med 1977; 89: 378-92.

14. Reiber JHC. An overview of coronary quantitation techniques as of 1989.
In:  Reiber  JHC,  Serruys  PW,  eds.  Quantitative  coronary
arteriography. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1991: 55-132.

15. Blankenhorn DH, Azen SP, Crawford DW, et al.  Effects of colestipol-
niacin therapy on human femoral atherosclerosis. Circulation 1991; 83:
438-47.

16. Blankenhorn DH, Nessim SA, Johnson RL, Sanmarco ME, Azen SP,
Cashin-Hemphill L. Beneficial effects of combined colestipol-niacin
therapy on coronary atherosclerosis and coronary venous bypass grafts.
JAMA 1987; 257:3233-40.

17. Buchwald H, Varco RL, Matts JP, et al.  Effect of partial ileal bypass
surgery on mortality and morbidity from coronary heart disease in

569

patients with hypercholesterolemia.  Report of the Program on the
Surgical Control of the Hyperlipidemias (POSCH). N Engl J Med
1990; 323: 946-55.

18. Brown BG, Albers JJ, Fisher ID, et al.  Regression of coronary artery
disease as a result of aggressive lipid lowering in men with high levels of
apolipoprotein B. N Engl J Med 1990; 323: 1289-98.

19. Kane JP, Malloy MJ, Ports TA, Phillips NR, Diehl JC, Havel RJ.
Regression of coronary atherosclerosis during treatment of familial
hypercholesterolaemia with combined drug regimens. JAMA 1990;
264: 1007-12.

20. Armstrong ML. Regression of atherosclerosis. In: Paoletti R, Gotto AM,
eds. Atherosclerosis reviews, vol 1. New York: Raven, 1976: 137-82.
21. Wissler  RW, Vesselinovitch  D.  Studies  of regression  of advanced
atherosclerosis in experimental animals and men. Ann NY Acad Sci
1976; 275: 363-78.

22. La Ville AE, Seddon AM, Shaikh M, Rowles PM, Woolf N, Lewis B.
Primary prevention of atherosclerosis by lovastatin in a genetically
hyperlipidaemic rabbit strain. Atherosclerosis 1989; 78: 205-10.

23. Habib JB, Wells C, Williams S, Henry PD. Atherosclerosis impairs
endothelium-dependent  arterial  relaxation.  Circulation  1984;  70:
123-26.

24. Vita JA, Treasure CB, Nabel EC, et al. Coronary vasomotor response to
acetylcholine  relates  to  risk  factors  for  coronary  artery  disease.
Circulation 1990; 81: 491-97.

25. Harrison DG, Armstrong ML, Freiman PC, Heistad DD. Restoration of
endothelium-dependent arterial  relaxation  by dietary  treatment of
atherosclerosis. Circulation 1987; 80: 1808-11.

26. Vartiainen I, Kanerva K. Arteriosclerosis and wartime. Ann Med Intern

Fen 1947; 34: 705-55.

27. Wilens.  The resorption of arterial  atheromatous deposits  in wasting

disease. Am J Pathol 1947; 33: 793-804.

28. Lewis  B,  Hammett F,  Katan  MB, et  al.  Towards  an  improved
lipid-lowering diet: additive effects of changes in nutrient intake. Lancet
1981; ii:  1310-13.

29. Choudhury S, Jackson P, Katan MB, et al.  A multifactorial diet in the

management of hyperlipidaemia. Atherosclerosis 1984; 50: 93-103.

30. Lipid Research Clinics Program. The Lipid Research Clinics coronary
primary prevention trial results, I. Reduction in incidence of coronary
heart disease. JAMA 1984; 251: 351-64.

31. Brensike  JF,  Levy RI,  Kelsey  SF,  et  al.  Effects  of therapy  with
cholestyramine on progression of coronary arteriosclerosis: results of
the NHLBI type II coronary intervention study. Circulation 1984; 69:
313-24.

32. Ambrose JA, Tannenbaum MA, Alexopoulos D, et al.  Angiographic
progression  of  coronary  artery  disease  and  the  development  of
myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 1988; 12: 56-62.

33. Hackett D, Vervilghen J, Davies G, et al. Coronary stenoses before and

after acute myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol 1989; 63: 1517-18.

34. Roussouw JE, Lewis B, Rifkind BM. The value of lowering cholesterol

after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 1990; 323: 1112-19.

Mechanism of grass-pollen-induced asthma

Many asthmatics are sensitive to rye-grass pollen,
but pollen grains are too large to penetrate the lower
airways. Our aim was to investigate the mechanism
by which rye-grass pollen causes asthma.

A major allergen of rye-grass pollen, Lol pIX, is
located in intracellular starch granules within pollen
grains.  In-vitro tests showed that pollen grains are
ruptured in rainwater by osmotic shock, each grain
releasing  about  700  starch  granules  into  the
environment. These granules are small enough to
enter the airways (<3 
&micro;m  in diameter). The starch
granules were present in atmospheric samples taken
during the  pollen  season,  and showed a  50-fold
increase  in  atmospheric  concentration  on  days
following  rainfall.  Isolated  granules  elicited  IgE-
mediated  responses  in  asthmatic  patients,  and 4
patients  with  rainfall-associated  asthma  who

underwent an inhalation challenge test had striking
bronchial  constriction  after  exposure  to  starch
granules.

Starch  granules  released  from  rye-grass  pollen

seem to be capable of causing asthma.

Introduction

Epidemics  of  asthma  have  been  associated  with
thunderstorms and related atmospheric events.1  On two

ADDRESSES.  School  of  Botany,  University  of  Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia (C. Suphioglu, BSc, M. B. Singh,
PhD,  P.  Taylor,  BSc,  Prof  R.  B  Knox,  DSc);  Respiratory Medicine
Department,  Monash Medical  Centre,  Clayton,  Victoria  (R.
Bellomo, FRACP, P.  Holmes, FRACP); and Allergy and Respiratory
Immunology Unit, Alfred Hospital,  Prahran, Victoria (R  Puy,
FRACP). Correspondence to Prof R  Bruce Knox.

