AHA Science Advisory

Lyon Diet Heart Study

Benefits of a Mediterranean-Style, National Cholesterol Education
Program/American Heart Association Step I Dietary Pattern on

Cardiovascular Disease

Penny Kris-Etherton, PhD, RD; Robert H. Eckel, MD; Barbara V. Howard, PhD;

Sachiko St. Jeor, PhD, RD; Terry L. Bazzarre, PhD; for the Nutrition Committee, Population Science

Committee, and Clinical Science Committee of the American Heart Association

Diet is a cornerstone of cardiovascular disease (CVD)

prevention and treatment efforts. Step I and Step II diets
are widely recommended as the first line of CVD interven-
tion.1 At the core of this dietary guidance are the recommen-
dations to decrease saturated fat and cholesterol and to
consume more fruits, vegetables, and whole grain products.
Information from an extensive database, especially regarding
saturated fat, indicates that these diets significantly lower
blood cholesterol
levels, a major risk factor for CVD.
Consequently, it is beyond debate that these diets reduce
CVD risk. Since the advent of Step I and Step II diets,
nutritionists have sought to develop effective implementation
strategies, including identifying dietary patterns that augment
the beneficial effects of these diets. Recent findings indicate
that we are making impressive progress in attaining these
goals. There is provocative evidence from the Lyon Diet
Heart Study2 suggesting that a Mediterranean-style, Step I
diet (emphasizing more bread, more root vegetables and
green vegetables, more fish, less beef, lamb and pork replaced
with poultry, no day without fruit, and butter and cream
replaced with margarine high in a-linolenic acid) has effects
that may be superior to those observed for the usual Step I
diet. These findings raise the interesting, but not yet corrob-
orated, question of whether a modified Step I diet (ie, a
Mediterranean-style Step I diet) that features a dietary pattern
consistent with the new American Heart Association (AHA)
Dietary Guidelines may augment the Step I or Step II diets
that are presently implemented in clinical practice.

Defining a Mediterranean-style diet is challenging given
the broad geographical region, including at least 16 countries,
that borders the Mediterranean Sea. As would be expected,
there are cultural, ethnic, religious, economic, and agricul-
tural production differences that result in different dietary
practices in these areas and that preclude a single definition of
a Mediterranean-style diet. Nonetheless, there is a dietary
pattern that is characteristic of Mediterranean-style diets. This
pattern emphasizes a diet that is high in fruits, vegetables,
bread, other forms of cereals, potatoes, beans, nuts, and seeds.

It includes olive oil as an important fat source and dairy
products, fish, and poultry consumed in low to moderate
amounts; eggs consumed zero to 4 times weekly; and little
red meat. In addition, wine is consumed in low to moderate
amounts. This dietary pattern is based on food patterns typical
of many regions in Greece and southern Italy in the early
1960s. The Mediterranean-style Step I diet used in the Lyon
Diet Heart Study was comparable to this pattern but uniquely
different in that it was high in a-linolenic acid.

The Lyon Diet Heart Study, a randomized, controlled trial
with free-living subjects,
tested the effectiveness of a
Mediterranean-type diet (consistent with the new AHA Diet-
ary Guidelines) on composite measures of the coronary
recurrence rate after a first myocardial infarction. Subjects in
the experimental group were instructed by the research
cardiologist and dietitian to adopt a Mediterranean-type diet
that contained more bread, more root vegetables and green
vegetables, more fish, fruit at least once daily, less red meat
(replaced with poultry), and margarine supplied by the study
to replace butter and cream. The saturated fatty acid (15%
kcal) and oleic acid (48% kcal but 5.4% kcal 18:1 trans)
contents in the margarine were comparable to those in olive
oil, with the exception that the margarine was higher in
linoleic acid (16.4% versus 8.6% kcal) and more so in
a-linolenic acid (4.8% versus 0.6% kcal). Exclusive use of
rapeseed oil and olive oil was recommended for salads and
food preparation. Use of olive oil exclusively was not
recommended because it was not acceptable as the only oil
source in the diet. Wine in moderation was allowed with
meals. Subjects in the experimental group participated in a
1-hour counseling session. In contrast, control subjects re-
ceived no specific dietary advice apart from that generally
provided by hospital dietitians or attending physicians.

The diet of the control group did not meet the AHA Step I
diet guidelines (,30% of calories from fat, 8% to 10% from
saturated fat, and ,300 mg/d cholesterol; Table). The AHA
recommends a Step II diet for individuals who have heart
disease or who have not met the LDL cholesterol treatment

This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee in July 2000. A single reprint is
available by calling 800-242-8721 (US only) or writing the American Heart Association, Public Information, 7272 Greenville Ave, Dallas, TX
75231-4596. Ask for reprint No. 71-0202.

(Circulation. 2001;103:1823-1825.)
© 2001 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation is available at http://www.circulationaha.org

1823

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on August 20, 20181824

Circulation

April 3, 2001

Nutrient Profile of the Mediterranean-Style Step I Diet in the Lyon Diet Heart
Study and the NCEP/AHA Step I and Step II Diets

Total calories
Percent of total calories

Fat
Saturated fat
Polyunsaturated fat
18:1 (n-9) (oleic acid)
18:2 (n-6) (linoleic acid)
18:3 (n-3) (linolenic acid)
Alcohol
Protein, %
Fiber, g
Cholesterol, mg/d

Lyon Diet
Heart Study

1947

Step I Diet

Step II Diet

To achieve and maintain desirable weight

30.4
8.0
4.6
12.9
3.6
0.84
5.8
16.2
18.6
203

#30
8–10

#30
,7

up to 10

up to 15 MUFA

’15
20–30*

,300

,200

MUFA indicates monounsaturated fat.
*A recommended total dietary fiber intake by many authorities.

goals of ,160 mg/dL (in individuals without coronary heart
disease and with ,2 risk factors) or ,130 mg/dL (in
individuals without coronary heart disease and with $2 risk
factors) after having followed a Step I diet. The Step II diet
allows ,30% of calories from fat, ,7% of calories from
saturated fat, and ,200 mg/d cholesterol (Table). Subjects in
the control group consumed a diet that included ’34% of
calories from fat, 12% from saturated fat, 11% from mono-
unsaturated fat, 6% from polyunsaturated fat, and 312 mg/d
of cholesterol. This diet
is comparable to that presently
consumed in the United States. In contrast, subjects on the
Mediterranean-style diet averaged 30% of calories from fat,
8% from saturated fat, 13% from monounsaturated fat, 5%
from polyunsaturated fat, and 203 mg/d of cholesterol (Ta-
ble). Moreover, these subjects consumed less linoleic acid
(3.6% versus 5.3% kcal) and more oleic acid (12.9% versus
10.8% kcal), a-linolenic acid (0.84% versus 0.29% kcal), and
dietary fiber. Plasma fatty acid analysis conducted after 52
weeks of follow-up confirmed the dietary fatty acid data. The
experimental group had higher plasma levels of oleic acid,
linolenic acid, and eicosapentaenoic acid and lower levels of
stearic acid, linoleic acid, and arachidonic acid. Thus, the
experimental group modified dietary fat and cholesterol,
consistent with the National Cholesterol Education Program/
AHA Step I diet, and implemented a Mediterranean-style
dietary pattern.

After 46 months of follow-up, 204 control and 219
experimental subjects (93% of the original cohort) partic-
ipated in the final examination. A total of 302 experimental
and 303 control group subjects were randomized into the
study; however, the study was stopped early because of
significant beneficial effects noted in the original cohort.
Despite a similar coronary risk factor profile (plasma lipids
and lipoproteins, systolic and diastolic blood pressure,
body mass index, and smoking status), subjects following
the Mediterranean-style diet had a 50% to 70% lower risk
of recurrent heart disease, as measured by 3 different
combinations of outcome measures including (1) cardiac

death and nonfatal heart attacks; (2) the preceding plus
unstable angina, stroke, heart failure, and pulmonary or
peripheral embolism; and (3) all of these measures plus
events that required hospitalization.

Although these results are quite impressive,

there are
methodological limitations that raise questions about the true
impact of this diet on the risk of recurrent heart disease and
related measures. Specifically, the baseline diet was only
assessed in the experimental group at the beginning of the
study, and the diet of the control group at baseline was
presumed to be comparable. Moreover, nutrient intake in the
control group was only assessed at the conclusion of the study
so the dietary behavior of these subjects would not be
influenced. Thus, it is not clear whether any dietary changes
were made by the control group. In addition, dietary data are
reported for only 83 (of 303 randomized into the study) and
144 (of 302 randomized into the study) subjects in the control
and experimental groups, respectively. With only 30% of the
total control cohort and ,50% of the total experimental
group providing dietary data at the conclusion of the study,
the diet of the other subjects who completed the study is not
known. This raises questions about
in
accounting for the results reported for recurrent coronary
events.

the role of diet

The findings from the Lyon Diet Heart Study illustrate the
potential importance of a dietary pattern that emphasizes
fruits, vegetables, breads and cereals, and fish, as well as
a-linolenic acid within the context of a Step I diet. The
clinical findings from the Lyon Diet Heart Study implicate
risk factors beyond lipids and lipoproteins, which have
historically been our primary targets of intervention. The fact
that omega-3 fatty acids exert cardioprotective effects via
multiple mechanisms (ie, prevent arrhythmia, have anti-
inflammatory properties, decrease synthesis of cytokines and
mitogens, stimulate endothelial-derived nitric oxide, are anti-
thrombotic, are prostaglandin and leukotriene precursors, and
inhibit atherosclerosis) suggest
they could have ac-
counted for the cardioprotective effect observed. The unprec-

that

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on August 20, 2018that

edented reduction in coronary recurrence rates, despite the
fact
lipid/lipoprotein risk factors were comparable,
clearly points to other important risk factor modifications as
major influences in the development of CVD. There is a
pressing need to identify these risk factor(s) and effective
intervention strategies. Moreover, had this dietary pattern
been prescribed with a Step II diet, as is presently recom-
mended for individuals with CVD, the beneficial effects of
the diet intervention could have been even more remarkable.
Irrespective of this, a Mediterranean-style Step I diet can be
followed by free-living people, although this diet plan has not
yet been evaluated in a long-term primary prevention model.
It would be short-sighted to not recognize the enormous
public health benefit that this diet could confer with adoption
by the population-at-large if the findings are confirmed. Thus,
the task at hand is to corroborate the results of the Lyon Diet
Heart Study in both primary and secondary prevention
models as expediently as possible and verify, as would be
expected, that this dietary pattern is safe. In the meantime, we
should take advantage of the possible opportunity to dramat-
ically lower CVD risk in the population by widely recom-
mending a Step I diet that features a dietary pattern that
includes fruits, root vegetables (ie, carrots, turnips, potatoes,
onions, radishes), leafy green vegetables, breads and cereals,
fish, and foods high in a-linolenic acid such as vegetable oils
(ie, flaxseed, canola), vegetable oil products (ie, salad dress-
ing and margarine made with nonhydrogenated oils high in
a-linolenic acid), and nuts and seeds (walnuts and flaxseed).
the AHA and its partners should take
advantage of the remarkable opportunity to dramatically
lower CVD risk in the population by funding further

In conclusion,

Kris-Etherton et al

Mediterranean Diet

1825

nutrition-based research. Research is needed to resolve what
dietary constituents confer the cardioprotective effect seen in
the Lyon Diet Heart Study. Although the authors propose that
a-linolenic acid plays an independent role in lowering CVD
risk, other dietary differences between the experimental and
control groups could account for the observed effects. Studies
are also needed to clarify whether additional effects can be
attained when a-linolenic acid is included in a Step I and Step
II diet. It will also be important to ascertain the specific
effects of an increased intake of fruits and vegetables. These
studies will provide important information about the effects
of a unique dietary pattern that emphasizes fruits, vegetables,
breads and cereals, fish, and a-linolenic acid in a Step I or
Step II diet. Funding is needed to address these questions and
move us closer to our long-sought goal of developing and
implementing dietary strategies that have a major beneficial
impact on CVD risk. The public health benefits that now
seem to be achievable by dietary intervention, using emerging
evidence, clearly warrant an investment of significant re-
search funding by the AHA and its partners.

References

1. National Cholesterol Education Program. Second Report of the Expert
Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cho-
lesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel II). Bethesda, Md: National
Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; 1993. NIH
Publication No. 93-3095.

2. de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL, et al. Mediterranean diet, traditional
risk factors, and the rate of cardiovascular complications after myocardial
infarction: final report of the Lyon Diet Heart Study. Circulation. 1999;
99:779 –785.

KEY WORDS: AHA Science Advisory n diet n cardiovascular diseases

Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on August 20, 2018