Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326 – 340

www.elsevier.com/locate/cardiores

Review

Nutrition, physical activity, and cardiovascular disease: An update

Louis J. Ignarro a, Maria Luisa Balestrieri b, Claudio Napoli c,⁎

a Department of Molecular Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States

b Department of Chemical Biology and Physics, Division of Clinical Pathology and Excellence Research Center on Cardiovascular Diseases,

Complesso S. Andrea delle Dame, 1st School of Medicine, II University of Naples, Naples 80138 Italy

c Department of General Pathology, Division of Clinical Pathology and Excellence Research Center on Cardiovascular Diseases,

Complesso S. Andrea delle Dame, 1st School of Medicine, II University of Naples, Naples 80138 Italy

Received 16 May 2006; received in revised form 12 June 2006; accepted 28 June 2006

Available online 21 July 2006

Time for primary review 20 days

Abstract

Many epidemiological studies have indicated a protective role for a diet rich in fruits and vegetables against the development and progression of
cardiovascular disease (CVD), one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Physical inactivity and unhealthy eating contribute to
these conditions. This article assesses the scientific rationale of benefits of physical activity and good nutrition on CVD, especially on atherosclerosis-
related diseases. Compelling evidence has accumulated on the role of oxidative stress in endothelial dysfunction and in the pathogenesis of CVD.
Reduced nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability due to oxidative stress seems to be the common molecular disorder comprising stable atherosclerotic
narrowing lesions. Energy expenditure of about 1000 kcal (4200 kJ) per week (equivalent to walking 1 h 5 days a week) is associated with significant
health benefits. Such benefits can be achieved through structured or nonstructured physical activity, accumulated throughout the day (even through
short 10-min bouts) on most days of the week. Some prospective studies showed a direct inverse association between fruit and vegetable intake and the
development of CVD incidents such as acute plaque rupture causing unstable angina or myocardial infarction and stroke. Many nutrients and
phytochemicals in fruits and vegetables, including fiber, potassium, and folate, could be independently or jointly responsible for the apparent reduction
in CVD risk. Novel findings and critical appraisal regarding antioxidants, dietary fibers, omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFAs),
nutraceuticals, vitamins, and minerals, are presented here in support of the current dietary habits together with physical exercise recommendations for
prevention and treatment of CVD.
© 2006 European Society of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier B.V.

Keywords: Nutrition; Physical activity; Cardiovascular disease

1. Introduction

To date cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains one of the
leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Although
genetic factors and age are important in determining the risk,
other factors, including hypertension, hypercholesterolemia,
insulin resistance, diabetes, and lifestyle factors such as smoking
and diet are also major risk factors associated with the disease
[1]. The emphasis so far has been on the relationship between
serum cholesterol levels and the risk of coronary heart disease
(CHD) [1,2]. Indeed, experimental, clinical, and epidemiologic

⁎ Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +39 081 293399.

E-mail address: claunap@tin.it (C. Napoli).

data capped by stunning interventional results with the statins
has established hypercholesterolemia as a major causative factor
in atherogenesis. It is equally clear that from the very beginning
atherogenesis has a strong inflammatory component, e. g., it is
characterized by penetration of monocytes and of T-cells into the
developing lesion. But inflammation has to occur in response to
something. What is that something? The case will be made that
oxidized lipids generated in response to prooxidative changes in
the cells of the artery wall should be considered a plausible
candidate (see below). Thus, there is no need to consider
hypercholesterolemia and inflammation as alternative hypoth-
eses. Both are very much involved.

In this update, we examine the scientific evidence in support
of both dietary and physical activity recommendations for CVD

0008-6363/$ - see front matter © 2006 European Society of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.cardiores.2006.06.030

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

327

it

is very difficult

prevention. There is a considerable weight of already published
articles elsewhere on this topic, thus, we decided to provide only
the novel findings and scientific trends coming in the latest
years. One problem is that
to assess
prospectively the causal relationship of nutrition/physical
exercise on major cardiovascular events. This is because the
natural history of such disease is often extremely long. Available
evidence indicates that persons who consume more fruits and
vegetables often have lower prevalence of important risk factors
for CVD, including hypertension, obesity, and type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Some large, prospective studies showed a direct
inverse association between fruit and vegetable intake and the
development of CVD incidents such as CHD and stroke.
However,
the biologic mechanisms whereby fruits and
vegetables may exert their effects are not entirely clear and are
likely to be multiple. Many nutrients and phytochemicals in
fruits and vegetables, including fiber, potassium, and folate,
could be independently or jointly responsible for the apparent
reduction in CVD risk [3,4]. Functional aspects of fruits and
vegetables, such as their low dietary glycemic load and energy
density, may also play a pivotal role.

There is a plethora of experimental and clinical studies
supporting the evidence that moderate exercise is a deterrent of
CVD and atherosclerosis [5–9]. We provided clear evidence for
the beneficial effects of graduated physical training (swim-
ming) and metabolic treatment (antioxidants and L-arginine) on
atherosclerotic lesion formation in hypercholesterolemic mice
[10]. These protective mechanisms could include increased
antioxidant defenses and NO bioactivity, reduced basal pro-
duction of oxidants (reduced oxidative stress), and reduction of
leak during oxidative phosphorylation [10–14].
radical
Basically, early oxidation-sensitive mechanisms are associated
with early stages of human atherogenesis [14–16].

Another study [17] also provided direct evidence that
inactivity enhances vascular oxygen radical production, endo-
thelial dysfunction and atherosclerosis in hypercholesterol-
emic mice. Thus, graduated exercise training can increase NO
bioavailability and convey benefit
in vasculoprotection
[10,18,19]. NO so generated may even scavenge overwhelm-
ing radicals, such as superoxide anion, thereby preventing
tissue damage. In contrast, prolonged strenuous exercise and
high blood pressure reduce the cyclic pulsations (physiological
shear stress), thereby limiting NO production [18,19]. NO
bioavailability can be restored by antioxidants and L-arginine,
the natural precursor of NO. Several small-scale studies have
demonstrated that intravenous L-arginine augments endothe-
lial function and improves exercise ability in patients with
CVD by enhancing vasodilation and reducing monocyte
adhesion [20] reviewed in [21]. L-arginine normalizes aerobic
capacity [22] and reduces fat mass in Zucker diabetic fatty rats
[23]. The lack of appropriate generation of endogenous NO is
an important progression factor of atherosclerosis in mice [24]
and L-arginine may reduce atherogenesis in hypercholesterol-
emic mice [25]. Thus, there is convincing evidence that mod-
erate physical exercise, antioxidants and L-arginine have
beneficial effects on atherosclerotic lesions.

Clinical studies have shown that severe physical exercise
can lead to the generation of more free radicals than the
endogenous antioxidant systems can scavenge, whereas mod-
erate intensity aerobic exercise improves endothelial function
and reduces cardiovascular risk [12,13]. Several highly plau-
sible protective mechanisms have been postulated, including
decreased myocardial oxygen demand, increased myocardial
oxygen supply, reduced propensity toward ventricular arrhyth-
mias, reduced platelet aggregation, improved lipid profile, and
increased plasma fibrinolytic activity [12,13]. Despite the
substantial body of literature, pathogenic mechanisms at the
cellular and molecular level by which exercise might benefit
vascular diseases are poorly understood. However, it is con-
ceivable that arterial cells can be affected by multiple signal
transduction events promoted by early graduated physical
exercise. Short-term oral administration of L-arginine im-
proved hemodynamics and exercise capacity in patients with
precapillary pulmonary hypertension [26], and enhanced myo-
cardial perfusion in CHD patients [27–32]. In addition, oral L-
arginine supplementation enhanced the beneficial effect of
exercise training on endothelial dysfunction in patients with
chronic heart failure [33]. From these points of view and mixed
background, we will try to update this field which is in con-
tinuous renewal.

2. Oxidative stress, L-arginine and nutritional aspects

Oxidative stress induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS
and other radical species) is considered to play an important
part in the pathogenesis of several diseases, including CHD,
stroke, cancer, shock and aging [34–39]. Oxidation of the
circulating low-density lipoprotein (LDL) that carry choles-
terol into the blood stream to oxidized LDL (LDLox) is
thought to play a pathogenic role in atherosclerosis, which is
the underlying disorder leading to heart attack and ischemic
stroke [1,2,37,40]. More importantly, during human fetal
development [15] and early infancy [16] there is evidence of
LDLox in early atherosclerotic lesions. Overall, a very com-
plex interaction between maternal cholesterolemia and fetal
circulation occurs during pregnancy (reviewed in 41 and 42).
Thus, antioxidant nutrients are believed to slow the pro-
gression of atherosclerosis because of their ability to inhibit
the damaging oxidative processes [37,40,41,43]. The “fetal
origins” hypothesis of atherogenesis postulates that condi-
tions, most likely nutritional and genetics, “program” the
fetus for the development of advanced forms of the CVD and
CHD in adulthood [41,44]. It remains to be established
whether these associations are causal. The role of birth weight
remains difficult to interpret except as a proxy for events in
intrauterine life. Unfortunately, birth weight does not make an
important contribution to the population attributable risk of
CVD; lifestyle factors during adulthood make much greater
contributions.

A number of antioxidants showed beneficial effect in
experimental models of atherosclerosis and CHD [1,2,35,37,
38,40,41,43]. Fig. 1 elucidates the cascade of oxidation-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

328

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

Fig. 1. Cartoon representing the general role of antioxidants, lycopene, PJ, wine, and 3-nPUFAs in the disruption of oxidation-sensitive events responsible
for upregulation of eNOS and oxidative damage to eNOS and/or BH4 and NADPH exceeding production of ROS. Part of this mechanicistic figure is
derived from Ref. [45]. Abbreviations: PJ, pomegranate juice. 3-nPUFAs, omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase.
BH4, (6R)-5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-L-biopterin. NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. ROS, reactive oxygen species, L-arg, L-arginine.

sensitive events and NO generation [45] in relation to some
antioxidant intervention. Recently, the combination of vita-
mins E and C and L-arginine, the natural precursor of nitric
oxide, provided convincing beneficial effects in perturbed
shear stress-induced atherosclerosis [20,46] and by enhanc-
ing the protection afforded by moderate physical exercise
[10]. LDLox may induce a decreased uptake of L-arginine
[47]. The local depletion of the L-arginine substrate may
derange the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), lead-
ing to overproduction of superoxide radical from oxygen, the
co-substrate of eNOS.
Interestingly, glycoxidized LDL
downregulates eNOS in human coronary cells [48]. Several
epidemiological and prospective studies have shown that
consumption of antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin E and
ß-carotene may reduce the risk of CHD [37,49,50]. Some
randomized clinical trials also suggest a reduced risk of CHD
with vitamin E supplementation [43,51–53]. However, some
large-scale human trials have failed to confirm the protective
effect of L-arginine or β-carotene and have produced in-
conclusive results with vitamin E.

In the recently completed Heart Outcomes Prevention
Evaluation (HOPE) Study [54,55] or in the Heart Protection
Study [56], supplementation with vitamin E did not result in
any beneficial effects on cardiovascular events. Another ran-
domized clinical trial on Vascular Interaction With Age in
Myocardial Infarction (VINTAGE MI) L-arginine, when
added to standard postinfarction therapies, does not improve
vascular stiffness measurements or ejection fraction and may
be associated with higher postinfarction mortality [57]. More-

over, also supplements combining folic acid and vitamins B6
and B12 did not reduce the risk of major cardiovascular events
in patients with vascular disease [58]. More likely, antioxidant
intervention may affect long-term lesion progression but not
necessarily modulate the properties of preexisting advanced
atherosclerotic lesions (i.e., CHD, cerebrovascular disease,
and peripheral arterial disease) or reduce the clinical mani-
festations of plaque rupture [37]. Thus, to test whether anti-
oxidants inhibit atherosclerosis it is necessary to investigate
the progression of early atherosclerotic lesions in young adults.
In addition, such intervention may prevent proatherogenic
programming events during fetal development [41].

3. Emerging nutritional aspects and CVD

3.1. Lycopene

Lycopene, a naturally present carotenoid in tomatoes and
tomato products, is one such dietary antioxidant that has
received much attention recently [59,60]. Epidemiological
studies have shown an inverse relationship between the in-
take of tomatoes and lycopene and serum and adipose tissue
lycopene levels and the incidence of CHD [61–64]. A num-
ber of in vitro studies have shown that lycopene can protect
native LDL from oxidation and can suppress cholesterol
synthesis [65,66]. However, dietary enrichment of endothe-
lial cells with ß-carotene but not lycopene inhibited the
oxidation of LDL [67]. One of the earlier studies that in-
vestigated the relationship between serum antioxidant status,

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

329

including lycopene and myocardial infarctions [68], reported
an odd ratio of 0.75. The strongest population-based
evidence from a recently reported multicenter case-control
study (EURAMIC) [61] indicated that only lycopene, and
not β-carotene, levels were found to be protective with an
odd ratio of 0.52 for the contrast of the 10th and 90th
percentiles with a P value of 0.005. A component of this
larger EUREMIC study representing the Malaga region was
analyzed further [69]. In this case-control study adipose
tissue lycopene levels showed an odd ratio of 0.39. In another
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) case-control
study, an odd ratio of 0.81 was observed when fasting serum
antioxidant levels of 231 cases and an equal number of
control subjects were assessed in relationship to the intima-
media thickness [70]. In a cross-sectional study comparing
Lithuanian and Swedish populations showing diverging
mortality rates from CHD,
lower blood lycopene levels
were found to be associated with increased risk and mortality
from CHD [71]. In the Austrian stroke prevention study,
lower levels of serum lycopene and α-tocopherol were
reported in individuals from an elderly population at high risk
for cerebral damage [72]. Although the epidemiological
studies conducted so far provide convincing evidence for the
role of lycopene in CHD prevention, it is at best only sug-
gestive and not proof of a causal relationship between ly-
copene intake and the risk of CHD. Such a proof can be
obtained only by performing controlled clinical dietary in-
tervention studies where both the biomarkers of the status of
oxidative stress and the disease are measured.

There is a need related to the identification of genetic
determinants or biomarkers that predict which individuals
are at highest risk for chronic heart failure (CHF). In dietary
intervention studies healthy human subjects, nonsmokers,
and not on any medication and vitamin supplements, con-
sumed lycopene (20 to 150 mg per day) from traditional
tomato products and nutritional supplement for 1 week re-
sulting in a significant increase in serum lycopene levels and
lower levels of serum lipid peroxidation, LDL cholesterol
protein, and DNA oxidation [73–75]. Fig. 1 suggests the
general role of antioxidant lycopene in the disruption of
oxidation-sensitive events. Long-term studies, the use of
well-defined subject populations, standardized outcome
measures of oxidative stress and the disease, and lycopene
ingestion are essential for a meaningful interpretation of the
results. Circulating and adipose tissue levels of lycopene
seem to be better indicators of disease prevention than die-
tary intake data. Moreover, we still underscore the fact that a
better understanding of how genes and gene–environment
interaction lead to the CVD is crucial together with a better
focusing of ethnic/racial differences in the development and
progression of CVD.

3.2. Polyphenols contained in the pomegranate fruit

Polyphenols are the most abundant antioxidants in the
diet. Their main dietary sources are fruits and plant-derived

beverages such as fruit juices, tea, coffee, red wine, cereals,
chocolate, and dry legumes. Their total dietary intake could
be as high as 1 g/d, which is much higher than that of all
other classes of phytochemicals and known dietary anti-
oxidants. For perspective, this is ∼10 times higher than the
intake of vitamin C and 100 times higher that the intakes of
vitamin E and carotenoids [76,77]. Despite their wide dis-
tribution in plants, the health effects of dietary polyphenols
have come to the attention of nutritionists only rather re-
cently [78]. For many years, polyphenols and other anti-
oxidants were thought to protect cell constituents against
oxidative damage through scavenging of free radicals. How-
ever, this concept now appears to be an oversimplified view
of their mode of action. More likely, cells respond to poly-
phenols mainly through direct interactions with receptors or
enzymes involved in signal transduction, which may result in
modification of the redox status of the cell and may trigger a
series of redox-dependent reactions [76,77,79]. Evidence for
a reduction of disease risk by flavonoids was considered
“possible” for CVD and “insufficient” for cancers in a recent
report from the World Health Organization [80]. Much of the
evidence on the prevention of diseases by polyphenols is
derived from in vitro or animal experiments, which are often
performed with doses much higher than those to which
humans are exposed through the diet [81–83]. Epidemio-
logic studies tend to confirm the protective effects of poly-
phenol consumption against CVD [84]. Both antioxidant and
prooxidant effects of polyphenols have been described, with
contrasting effects on cell physiologic processes. As anti-
oxidants, polyphenols may improve cell survival; as pro-
oxidants,
tumor
growth [85]. However, the biological effects of polyphenols
may extend well beyond the modulation of oxidative stress.
There is a significant history regarding the well known
pomegranate fruit (Punica granatum L.) [86–91]. The
soluble polyphenol content of pomegranate juice (PJ) varies
within the limits of 0.2–1.0%, depending on variety, and
includes mainly anthocyanins, catechins, ellagic tannins, and
gallic and ellagic acids [87,88,91]. More importantly, PJ
possesses potent antioxidant activity that elicits antiathero-
genic properties in mice [91–93] and can inhibit cycloox-
ygenases and lipoxygenases [89]. Prolonged supplementation
with PJ can largely correct the perturbed shear stress-induced
proatherogenic disequilibrium by increasing eNOS activity
and decreasing redox-sensitive transcription factors both in
vitro in cultured human coronary artery EC and in vivo in
hypercholesterolemic mice [93,94].

they may induce apoptosis and prevent

Vascular disorders such as atherosclerosis cause disturbed
blood flow in the affected regions, and this leads to perturbed
shear stress that, in turn, causes endothelial damage [95]. Our
findings of reductions in macrophage foam cell formation,
oxidation-specific epitopes, and lesion area in atherosclerotic
prone lesion regions (low- and high-prone areas) in PJ-treated
mice [93] clearly confirm the correlation between antiox-
idative effects and antiatherogenic properties, elicited by PJ,
as was observed in other studies [91,92,96]. Modulation of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

330

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

redox-sensitive transcription factors (ELK-1 and p-JUN) and
eNOS expression is associated with antiatherogenic activity
in such areas [93]. These effects are similar to those elicited
by antioxidants (vitamins E and C) and L-arginine [20]. The
antioxidant level in PJ was found to be higher than in other
natural juices such as blueberry, cranberry, and orange, as
well as in red wine [97]. Polyphenols from red wine can
reduce LDL aggregation in vitro and in vivo [97–99], and PJ
administered to hypertensive patients causes also a signifi-
cant decline in systemic blood pressure [100]. PJ consump-
tion for 3 years by patients with carotid artery stenosis
reduced common carotid intima-media thickness, blood
pressure, and LDL oxidation [101]. Accordingly, tea pigment
(and possibly polyphenols) exerted some antiatherosclerotic
effects [102]. More recently, it was shown that short- and
long-term black tea consumption reverses endothelial
dysfunction in CVD patients [103]. Similarly, the ingestion
of polyphenols contained in purple grape juice had beneficial
effects on endothelial function in patients with CHD [104].
Taken together, these data suggest that polyphenols can
protect arteries from vascular damage via antioxidant effects
and NO restoration.

However, certain large clinical trials using different an-
tioxidants have failed to show any beneficial effects in terms
of prevention of major CVD events [105,14,95]. One pos-
sible explanation of this divergence is that the models used in
experimental studies, although very useful to study patho-
physiological mechanisms, may not precisely reflect
the
disease in humans [105,14,95]. Alternatively, the doses of
antioxidants used in those few studies may not have been
appropriate, and/or the progression of disease may have been
too severe. More recently, PJ has been shown to revert the
potent downregulation of the expression of eNOS induced
by LDLox in human coronary endothelial cells [106] sug-
gesting that PJ can exert beneficial effects on the evolution of
clinical vascular complications, CHD, and atherogenesis in
humans by enhancing the eNOS bioactivity. PJ, tested for its
capacity to upregulate and/or activate eNOS in bovine pul-
monary artery endothelial cells, elicited no effects on eNOS
protein expression or catalytic activity thus indicating that PJ
possesses potent antioxidant activity that results in marked
protection of NO against oxidative destruction, thereby re-
sulting in augmentation of the biological actions of NO
[107]. Along with components of the PJ studied for their
antioxidant properties, i.e., PJ sugar fraction and pomegran-
ate polyphenolic phytochemicals, pomegranate by-product
(PBP) which includes the whole pomegranate fruit left after
juice preparation), determined a reduction in atherosclerotic
lesion size by up to 57% and a reduced oxidative stress in the
apolipoprotein E-deficient mice (E degrees) peritoneal
macrophages [108–111]. Daily consumption of PJ by dia-
betic patients resulted in antioxidative effects on serum and
macrophages [112] and improved stress-induced myocardial
ischemia in patients who have CHD [113]. Thus, PJ and its
by-products may improve redox status of the arterial cells
(Fig. 1).

3.3. Dietary fiber

Recent cohort studies have found a consistent protective
effect of dietary fiber on CVD outcomes, prompting many
leading organizations to recommend increased fiber in the
daily diet [114]. However, the biologic mechanisms ex-
plaining how a fiber influences the cardiovascular system
have yet to be fully elucidated. Recent research in large
national sample in the USA has demonstrated an association
between dietary fiber and levels of C-reactive protein (CRP),
a clinical indicator of inflammation. Epidemiologic evidence
demonstrating that high-fiber diets are beneficial, coupled
with this newer evidence of a possible metabolic effect on
inflammatory markers, suggests that inflammation may be
an important mediator in the association between dietary
fiber and CVD. In the Nurses Health Study, women in the
highest quintile of fiber intake (median 22.9 g/day) had an
age-adjusted relative risk for major coronary events that was
47% lower than women in the lowest quintile (11.5 g/day)
[115]. In a cross-sectional study to analyze the relation be-
tween the source or type of dietary fiber intake and CVD risk
factors in a cohort of adult men and women, indicate that the
highest total dietary fiber and insoluble dietary fiber intakes
were associated with a significantly lower risk of overweight
and elevated waist-to-hip ratio, blood pressure, plasma
apolipoprotein (apo) B, apo B:apo A–I, cholesterol, tria-
cylglycerols, and homocysteine [116]. Soluble fiber, i.e.,
beta-glucans, pectin, decreases serum total and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations and improves insulin
resistance. Practical recommendations for CVD prevention
include food-based approach favoring increased intake of
whole-grain and dietary fiber (especially soluble fiber), fruit,
and vegetables providing a mixture of different types of
fibers [117,118].

3.4. Fatty acids

Evidence from epidemiologic and clinical secondary pre-
vention trials suggests n-3 PUFAs may have a significant role
in the prevention of CHD [reviewed in 119]. Dietary sources
of n-3 PUFAs include fish oils, rich in eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), along with plants
rich in a-linolenic acid. Randomized secondary prevention
clinical trials with fish oils (eicosapentaenoic acid, docosa-
hexaenoic acid) and a-linolenic acid have demonstrated
reductions in risk that compare favorably to those seen in
landmark secondary prevention trials with lipid-lowering
drugs. The anti-inflammatory activity of fish oil may vary
among different sources due to variations in EPA/DHA
content [120]. PUFAs, and especially total n-3 fatty acids,
were independently associated with lower levels of proin-
flammatory markers (IL-6, IL-1ra, TNF-α, C-reactive
protein) and higher levels of anti-inflammatory markers
(soluble IL-6r, IL-10, TGFα) [121]. Several mechanisms
explaining the cardioprotective effect of the n-3 PUFA have
been suggested including antiarrhythmic and antithrombotic

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

331

roles. n-3 PUFAs have been recently shown to directly inhibit
vascular calcification via p38-MAPK and PPAR-gamma
pathways, and to reduce gene expression of cyclooxygenase-
2, an inflammatory gene involved in plaque angiogenesis and
plaque rupture through the activation of some metalloprotei-
nases and reduction of oxidative stress (Fig. 1). The
quenching of gene expression of pro-inflammatory pro-
atherogenic genes by omega-3 fatty acids has consequences
on the extent of leukocyte adhesion to vascular endothelium,
early atherogenesis and later stages of plaque development
and plaque rupture, ultimately yielding a plausible compre-
hensive explanation for the vasculoprotective effects of these
nutrients [122,123]. The modulation of channel activities,
especially voltage-gated Na(+) and L-type Ca(2+) channels,
by the n-3 PUFA may explain, at least partially, the anti-
arrhythmic action [124]. It does seem clear from recent
prospective randomized trials that both fish and plant sources
of n-3 PUFAs can favorably impact CV health [125–127].
Although official US guidelines for the dietary intake of n-3
PUFA are not available, several international guidelines have
been published. Fish is an important source of the n-3 PUFA
in the US diet; however, vegetable sources including grains
and oils offer an alternative source for those who are unable to
regularly consume fish. Table 1 shows a summary of ran-
domized clinical
trials examining the effects of dietary
interventions with fatty acids on biomarkers of inflammation
[128–145].

3.5. Ethanol and nonethanolic components of wine

During the last decade, several groups have reported that,
in animal models of myocardial ischemia/reperfusion, certain
nutrients, including ethanol and nonethanolic components of
wine, may have a specific protective effect on the myo-
cardium, independent of the classical risk factors implicated
in vascular atherosclerosis and thrombosis [146]. Mechan-
isms through which the consumption of alcoholic beverages
protects against ischemia-induced cardiac injury are not yet
fully characterized. The protective effect of alcohol has been
primarily explained by an action on blood lipids (increase in
high-density lipoprotein levels) and platelets (decreased
aggregation) resulting in a reduced rate of coronary artery
obstruction [147–149]. Other mechanisms are probably in-
volved. Moderate alcohol has been shown to improve post-
ischemic myocardial systolic and diastolic function in rats
and to attenuate the post-ischemic reduction in coronary
vascular resistance [150]. Moderate drinking may improve
the early outcomes after acute myocardial infarction and
prevent sudden cardiac death [151], suggesting a direct effect
of ethanol on the ischemic myocardium that has been referred
to as ‘ethanol preconditioning’ [152]. To date, adenosine type
1 (A(1)) receptors, alpha(1)-adrenoceptors, the epsilon iso-
form of protein kinase C (PKC), and adenosine triphosphate-
dependent potassium (KATP) channels have been shown to
mediate cardioprotection associated with chronic ethanol
ingestion [153,154]. Both alcohol and polyphenolic antiox-

idant components contribute to the cardioprotective effects of
wine compared to other alcoholic beverages (Fig. 1). The
polyphenolic antioxidants present in red wine provide cardio-
protection by their ability to function as in vivo antioxidants
while its alcoholic component or alcohol by itself imparts
cardioprotection by adapting the hearts to oxidative stress.
Moderate alcohol consumption induced significant amount
of oxidative stress to the hearts which was then translated into
the induction of the expression of several cardioprotective
oxidative stress-inducible proteins including heat shock
protein (HSP) [155]. Other studies suggested anti-inflamma-
tory and/or antioxidant effects of moderate drinking [146].
One major open question is whether ethanol and nonethanolic
components of wine are cardioprotective, at least in part, by
interfering with the myocardial prooxidant/antioxidant
balance.

Important concepts, such as cardiac preconditioning, are
now entering the field of nutrition, and recent experimental
evidence suggests that ethanol and/or nonethanolic compo-
nents of wine might exert preconditioning effects in animal
models of myocardial
ischemia/reperfusion. There is no
doubt that such an observation, if confirmed in human sub-
jects, might open new perspectives in the prevention and
treatment of ischemic CHD.

4. Physical exercise and CVD

Regular physical activity causes substantial performance-
improving and health-enhancing effects. Most of them are
highly predictable, dose-dependent and generalizable to a
wide range of population subgroups. Many of the biological
effects of regular, moderate physical activity translate into
reduced risk of CHD, cerebrovascular disease, hypertension,
maturity onset diabetes, overweight and obesity, and osteo-
porosis. In the genesis of these conditions, a lack of physical
activity and inadequate nutrition act synergistically and in
part additively, and they operate largely through the same
pathways [156]. Indeed, numerous studies have demonstrat-
ed a reduced rate of initial CHD events in physically active
people [7,8,157]. These findings, along with those from
studies that demonstrate biologically plausible cardioprotec-
tive mechanisms, provide strong body of evidence that reg-
ular physical activity of at least moderate intensity reduces
the risk of CVD major events, thus leading to the conclusion
that physical inactivity is a major CHD risk factor. Fig. 2
shows changes in cellular NO, ROS, and scavenger levels in
relation to physical exercise degree (strenuous, moderate, or
none) indicating reduction of oxidative stress in moderate
physical activity. An even greater impact is seen when the
endurance exercise program is of sufficient intensity and
volume to improve aerobic capacity.

Molecular events associated with physical exercise effects
on both endothelium and muscle function, such as high
phosphate metabolism and reduced vascular expression of
NAD(P)H oxidase can be altered by stopping regular ex-
ercise [158,159]. Data from the Health Professionals'

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

332

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

Follow-up Study [160] also provide robust evidence that as
little as 30 min per week of strength training may reduce the
risk of an initial coronary event. Guidelines for prescribing
aerobic and resistance exercise for patients with CVD are
available elsewhere [156,161].

4.1. Exercise programming recommendations

Specific integrating exercise programming activity
recommendations are available for women [162], older

adults [163], patients with CHF and heart transplants [164],
stroke survivors [165], and patients with claudication in-
duced by peripheral arterial disease [166]. Exercise training
and regular daily physical activities are essential for im-
proving a cardiac patient's physical fitness. The occurrence
of major CVD events during supervised exercise in con-
temporary programs ranges from 1/50 000 to 1/120 000
patient-hours of exercise, with only 2 fatalities reported per
1.5 million patient-hours of exercise [167]. Contemporary
risk-stratification procedures for the management of CHD

Table 1
Summary of randomized clinical trials examining the effects of dietary interventions with fatty acids on biomarkers of inflammation

Subjects

Type and duration of dietary intervention/enrichment

Change in biomarkers of Inflammation

Saturated and trans fatty acids
Healthy adult males

Control diet (30% fat) or experimental diets (39% fat) with
8% substitution of oleic acid, trans fatty acid, saturated
fatty acids, stearic acid, or trans + stearic acid; 5 weeks

Moderately

hypercholesterolemic adults

Moderately

hypercholesterolemic adults

Type 2 diabetic patients and

matched healthy subjects

Experimental diets (30% fat) two-thirds fats substituted
with soybean oil, semi-liquid margarine, soft margarine,
shortening, stick margarine, or butter; 35 days
Experimental diets (30% fat) two-thirds fats substituted
with soybean oil, soybean oil-based stick margarine, or
butter; duration 32 days
High-fat diet (59% fat) or high-carbohydrate diet (73%
carbohydrates), with or without antioxidants; 4-day study,
1 week apart

↑CRP and E-selectin levels with trans fat diet compared
with control; ↑fibrinogen in stearic acid diet vs control; no
difference in any marker between oleic acid diet and
control; (P b 0.05)
No effect on CRP with any dietary fat type (P N 0.05)

↑IL-6 and TNF-α with stick margarine diet vs soybean oil
diet (P b 0.05)

[130]

↑IL-6, TNF-α, ICAM-1, VCAM-1 in healthy and diabetic
subjects with high-fat meal;
increased levels only in
diabetics with high-carbohydrate meal (P b 0.05)

[131]

[Ref.]

[128]

[129]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]
[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

Monounsaturated fatty acids
Patients with established and

treated CAD

Patients with metabolic

syndrome

Polyunsaturated fatty acids
Moderately

hypercholesterolemic adults

Hypercholesterolemic adults

Healthy subjects

Obese men
Men and postmenopausal

women

Male dyslipidemic patients

Treated-hypertensive

type 2 diabetic subjects

Postmenopausal women using

HRT

Obese and lean

normolipidemic men

Conjugated linoleic acid
Healthy volunteers

Mediterranean diet group or written advice-only group;
1 year
Mediterranean-style diet or prudent diet; 2 years

No effects (P N 0.05)

↓hs-CRP, IL-6, IL-7, IL-18, with Mediterranean diet vs
prudent diet (P b 0.05)

ALA-enriched (15% ALA, 46% LA) or LA-enriched
(58% LA, 0.3% ALA) margarine; 2 years
ALA diet (6.5% ALA, 10.5% LA), LA diet
(12.6% LA, 3.6% ALA) or AAD
(7.7% LA, 0.8% ALA); 6 weeks
1.5 g EPA + DHA, with or without 800 IU all-rac
alpha-tocopherol; 12 weeks
1.35 g of EPA + DHA or placebo capsules; 6 weeks
1.5 g EPA + DHA or placebo; 12 weeks

↓CRP in the ALA group vs LA (P b 0.05)

↓CRP, VCAM-1, and E-selectin in ALA group vs LA;
decreased ICAM-1 in ALA and LA groups vs AAD
(P b 0.05)
No effects (P N 0.05)

No effects (P N 0.05)
No effects (P N 0.05)

15 mL linseed oil (8 g ALA) or 15 mL safflower oil
(11 g LA); 12 weeks
4 g, DHA, or placebo; 6 weeks

↓CRP, SAA, and IL-6 in ALA group; no effects with LA
(P b 0.05)
No effects (P N 0.05)

1.33 g EPA + DHA, or 2.56 g EPA + DHA, or placebo;
5 weeks
4 g EPA + DHA, with or without atorvastatin (40 mg);
6 weeks

↓CRP and IL-6 with fish oil vs placebo (P b 0.05)

↓CRP and IL-6 with fish oil + atorvastatin, but not with
fish oil alone (P N 0.05)

4.2 g CLA isomer mixture or placebo; 12 weeks

Adults with diet-controlled

3.0 g CLA isomer mixture or placebo; 8 weeks

type 2 diabetes

Men with metabolic syndrome 3.4 g CLA, or 3.4 g purified t10c12 CLA,

or placebo; 12 weeks

↑CRP with CLA mixture vs placebo (P b 0.01); no effects
on TNF-α and VCAM-1 (P N 0.05)
CLA ↓fibrinogen (P b 0.01); no effects on CRP, IL-6
(P N 0.05)
↑CRP with t10c12 CLA supplementation vs placebo
(P b 0.01)

AAD indicates average American diet; HRT, hormone replacement therapy. ↑ (increased) and ↓ (decreased).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

333

Fig. 2. Different effects of physical exercise on redox status of the cell. Abbreviations: ROS, reactive oxygen species. NO, nitric oxide.

help to identify patients who are at
increased risk for
exercise-related cardiovascular events and who may require
more intensive cardiac monitoring in addition to the medical
supervision provided for all cardiac rehabilitation program
participants [168]. Supervised rehabilitative exercise for 3 to
6 months generally is reported to increase a patient's peak
oxygen uptake by 11% to 36%, with the greatest improve-
ment in the most deconditioned individuals [169]. Improved
fitness enhances a patient's quality of life and even can help
older adults to live independently [170]. Improved physical
fitness also is associated with reductions in submaximal
heart rate, systolic blood pressure, and rate-pressure product
(RPP), thereby decreasing myocardial oxygen requirements
during moderate-to-vigorous activities of daily living [171].
Furthermore, improvement in cardiorespiratory endurance
on exercise testing is associated with a significant reduction
in subsequent CVD fatal and nonfatal events independent of
other risk factors [172–175]. These findings also apply to
patients with CHF. In a recent meta-analysis of 81 studies
involving 2587 patients with stable CHF [176],
it was
demonstrated a trend toward increased survival associated
with improved functional capacity, as well as a reduction in
cardiorespiratory symptoms after aerobic and strength train-
ing. Physical activity can be recommended as a preventive
therapy to people of all ages. However, one serious concern
related to the fact that physical exercise program should be
administered cautiously and gradually in patients with long-
term established sedentary style of life.

4.2. Aerobic fitness

There is incontrovertible evidence from observational and
randomized trials that regular physical activity contributes to
the primary and secondary prevention of CVD and is asso-

ciated with a reduced risk of premature death. Physical
fitness refers to a physiologic state of well-being that allows
one to meet the demands of daily living (health-related
physical fitness) or that provides the basis for sport per-
formance (performance-related physical fitness), or both.
Aerobic fitness refers to the body's ability to transport and
use oxygen during prolonged strenuous exercise or work
whereas anaerobic fitness refers to the body's ability to
produce energy without the use of oxygen. Recent research-
ers have proposed that anaerobic capacity plays an important
role in the performance of many activities of daily living
[177,178]. Maximum anaerobic power (the maximum rate at
which energy is produced without the use of oxygen) is
generally taken as the standard measure of anaerobic fitness.
Aerobic fitness is commonly measured by a person's max-
imum aerobic power (VO2max), the maximum amount of
oxygen that can be transported and used by the working
muscles. The direct assessment of VO2max is generally
conducted with the use of commercially available metabolic
carts and requires highly trained staff. Owing to the com-
plexity and cost of the direct assessment, many health and
fitness professionals prefer to estimate VO2max without
measuring oxygen consumption. A variety of tests are avail-
able to measure aerobic fitness indirectly, including sub-
maximal
the
modified Canadian Aerobic Fitness Test and the YMCA
cycle ergometer protocol) and incremental to maximal tests
(i.e., the Bruce protocol) that involve a variety of exercise
modalities (i.e., cycling, running, stair climbing, rowing).
Often heart rate is used to estimate VO2max during sub-
maximal or maximal exercise tests. A lower heart rate for a
given workload is thought to represent a higher level of
aerobic fitness. Many fitness and health professionals prefer
to use exercise time or estimated oxygen cost (i.e., metabolic

the Rockport One Mile Test,

tests (e.g.,

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

334

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

equivalents [METs]) for the last stage completed during an
incremental protocol to estimate aerobic fitness. To achieve a
reasonable and reliable estimate of VO2max, these indirect
assessments must be conducted in a highly standardized and
reproducible fashion.

Musculoskeletal fitness can be assessed relatively easily
within and outside of the laboratory setting. Common tests
include grip strength, push-ups, curl-ups (muscular endur-
ance) and sit-and-reach tests (flexibility). Health practitioners
should be aware that there are subtle differences between
patient groups with respect to fitness testing. A series of field
tests have been developed (i.e., the Leger 20-m shuttle test
[179]) that provide valid and reliable determinants of aerobic
fitness. In addition, it may be best to ask children to perform
running activities instead of cycling activities because of their
less developed muscular strength [180]. The American
College of Sports Medicine has outlined special considera-
tions that must be taken when assessing the physical fitness of
elderly people [181]. Aging people are at increased risk of
arrhythmias during exercise, and they commonly use medi-
cations that may affect physiologic responses to exercise. It is
preferable to use equipment that promotes safety (e.g., tread-
mills with handrails, cycle ergometers). For obese people, one

Table 2
Relative intensity of effort and representative 7-month exercise program

must be aware of the effect of obesity on their ability to
conduct certain tests and the physiologic response to exercise.
Obese people may also be prone to orthopedic injuries, and
their heart rate response to exercise may differ from that of
nonobese people [182].

4.3. Physical exercise life style

Special care must also be taken during the assessment of
people with chronic disease. For instance, patients with CVD
should be monitored closely during physiologic testing. The
appraiser must have a clear understanding of the effects of
the patient's clinical status and medications on the phy-
siologic response to exercise. Low-intensity exercise is gen-
erally better accepted by people naive to exercise training,
those who are extremely deconditioned (“out of shape”) and
older people. Low-intensity exercise may result in an im-
provement in health status with little or no change in physical
fitness. Indeed, light or moderate activity is associated with a
reduced risk of death from any cause among men with
established CHD. Furthermore, regular walking or moderate
to heavy gardening has been shown to be sufficient
in
achieving these health benefits [183]. Low-fit people can

Panel A. Relative intensities for aerobic exercise prescription (for activities lasting up to 60 min)
Intensity (⁎range required for health) % HR max Category-ratio RPE scale Breathing rate
Very light effort
Light effort⁎
Moderate effort⁎
Vigorous effort⁎
Very hard effort
Maximal effort

b35
35–54
55–69
70–89
N89
100

b2
2–3
4–6
7–8
9
10

Body temperature

Example of activity

Normal
Slight increase
Greater increase
More out of breath
Greater increase
Completely out of breath Very hot, perspiring heavily Sprinting all-out

Normal
Start to feel warm
Warm
Quite warm
Hot

Dusting
Light gardening
Brisk walking
Jogging
Running fast

Panel B. Example of a 7-month exercise program for a healthy adult

Program stage

Initial stage
Perform light muscular endurance activities

Engage in aerobic exercise of light to

moderate intensity

Improvement
Increase exercise intensity and duration with

improved fitness

Try to achieve health and fitness goals

Maintenance
Try to maintain health-related fitness

Length of
program (wk)

Frequency
(day s/wk)

Intensity

% HRmax

RPE

Breathing rate

Time per session/min

1
2
3
4

5–7
8–10
11–13
14–16
17–20

21–24

24–28

3
3
3
3

4
4
3–5
3–5
3–5

3–5

3–5

60
60
65
65

70
70
75
75
75

80

80

2–4
2–4
3–5
3–5

3–5
3–5
4–6
4–6
4–8

4–8

4–8

Slightly increased
Slightly increased
Noticeable increased
Noticeable increased

Noticeable increased
Noticeable increased
Noticeable increased
Noticeable increased
More difficult talking
while exercising
More difficult talking
while exercising

More difficult talking
while exercising

20
20
20
25

25
30
30
30
35

35

40

Created with modification from information provided in the handbook for Canada's Physical Activity Guide to Healthy Active Living, and the American College
of Sports Medicine's guidelines for exercise testing and prescriptions [157,160–163].
Abbreviations: HR max=maximum hearth rate, RPE=patient's rating of perceived exertion, wk=week.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

335

training intensity (e.g., 40%–50% of heart

attain significant improvements in physical fitness with a
lower
rate
reserve) than that needed by people with a higher baseline
fitness level, whereas the latter would need a greater level of
exercise intensity to achieve further improvements in fitness
[184,185]. Deconditioned people may improve physical
fitness with as little as 2 exercise sessions per week [186]. In
fact, some have shown an improvement in aerobic fitness
with exercise intensities as low as 30% of heart rate reserve
in sedentary people [187]. However, adherence to this form
of exercise may be poor and the risk of musculoskeletal
injury high, especially in people unaccustomed to exercise
[188,189]. Many health professionals recommend a mini-
mum level of energy expenditure of about 1000 kcal
(4200 kJ) per week, acknowledging the additive benefits of
higher levels of energy expenditure. Expending 1000 kcal
(4200 kJ) per week is equivalent to 1 h of moderate walking
5 days a week. However, a lower level may also achieve
health benefits [190]. The American College of Sports
Medicine has stated that health benefits occur with energy
expenditures as low as 700 kcal (2940 kJ) per week, with
additional benefits occurring at higher levels [184]. The
recommended daily energy expenditure for health is
currently 150–400 kcal (630–1680 kJ) per day [180]. For
instance, if a previously sedentary person exercised at the
lower end of the recommended amount (150 kcal [630 kJ])
on most days of the week, he or she would approach the
health-related goal of 1000 kcal (4200 kJ) per week. It is
important to stress that an increase of 1000 kcal (4200 kJ) per
week in physical activity or of 1 MET in physical fitness
appears to confer a mortality benefit of 20% [191]. This
highlights the importance of commencing a training program
that is progressive in nature.

Subjective indicators of the relative intensity of effort are
shown in Table 2 (Panel A). For instance, participants are
often prescribed exercise that they perceive to be of moderate
intensity. The most commonly used scale is the RPE (rating of
perceived exertion) scale [192,193]. An example of a 7-month
exercise prescription that incorporates objective and subjec-
tive indicators of exercise intensity is provided in Table 2
(Panel B) for a healthy adult starting an exercise program. The
general principles for healthy adults can be applied in the
training of patients with CVD. Such patients should engage in
20–60 min of exercise on most days of the week. An energy
expenditure of about 1600 kcal (6720 kJ) per week has been
shown to effectively halt the progression of coronary artery
disease, and an expenditure of 2200 kcal (9240 kJ) per week
has been associated with plaque reduction and a reversal of
the disease [194,195]. There are, however, slight differences
in the exercise prescription model for patients with CVD. The
duration of each session depends on the clinical status of the
patient [196]. The minimal training intensity threshold is about
45% of the heart rate reserve for patients with CHD [195],
compared with 30% of the heart rate reserve for unfit healthy
people [187]. This difference is thought to be the result of the
difficulty for CVD patients in achieving true maximum effort

during a stress test [187]. A similar intensity is used for CHF
patients when they begin many traditional rehabilitation
programs. Additional benefits, however, are likely achieved
with higher exercise intensities, if tolerated and safe for the
patient [195].

5. Conclusions

Unfortunately,

in Western countries the high CVD
prevalence is largely attributable to the contemporary life-
style which is often sedentary, and includes a diet high in
saturated fat and sugar, and low in n-3 PUFAs, fruit,
vegetables and fiber. In combination with drug treatment,
intervention in the area of nutrition and physical activity is
the recommended treatment for patients at a high risk of
CVD. Any strategy that can influence health maintenance
is of interest, especially lifestyle factors such as nutrition,
exercise or stress control. Integrated actions against risk
factors (i.e., smoking, physical inactivity, and unhealthy
diet), implemented within the social context, can lead to
the reduction of major CVD events. Growing evidence
clearly indicates that antioxidants, dietary fibers, poly-
phenols contained in the PJ, n-3 PUFAs, wine, vitamins,
and minerals, together with physical exercise reduce risk
factors for CVD.

However, some large-scale clinical trials in subjects with
advanced atheroma failed to confirm the protective effects of
some antioxidants. Because of the extremely long history of
CVD, the causal relationship of nutrition/physical exercise
on major CVD events is still difficult to assess prospectively.
The ability to predict outcomes in patients with CVD remains
imperfect. Some research questions yet remaining include the
identification of optimal genetic determinants or biomarkers
for predicting CVD and a better understanding of how gene–
environment
interaction can influence CVD. The well-
being of general population necessarily comes from ade-
quate physical activity together with careful nutritional
habits.

Acknowledgement

The work of authors involving the pomegranate juice was
funded partially by a grant from the Lynda and Stewart
Resnick Revocable Trust to L.J.I and C.N. Dr. Ignarro wishes
also to disclose that he helped develop and has a financial
interest in a commercially available dietary supplement that
contains some of the amino acids and antioxidants reported
in this review.

References

[1] Ross R. Atherosclerosis—an inflammatory disease. N Engl J Med

1999;340:115–26.

[2] Steinberg D. Thematic review series: the pathogenesis of atheroscle-
rosis: an interpretive history of the cholesterol controversy, part III:
mechanistically defining the role of hyperlipidemia. J Lipid Res
2005;46:2037–51.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

336

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

[3] Bazzano LA, Serdula MK, Liu S. Dietary intake of fruits and
vegetables and risk of cardiovascular disease. Curr Atheroscler Rep
2003;5:492–9.

[4] Houston MC. Nutraceuticals, vitamins, antioxidants, and minerals in
the prevention and treatment of hypertension. Prog Cardiovasc Dis
2005;47:396–449.

[5] Blumenthal JA, Emery CF, Madden DJ, George LK, Coleman RE,
Riddle MW, et al. Cardiovascular and behavioral effects of aerobic
exercise training in healthy older men and women. J Gerontol 1989;44:
M147–57.

[6] Kramsch DM, Aspen AJ, Abramowitz BM, Kreimendahl T, Hood Jr WB.
Reduction of coronary atherosclerosis by moderate conditioning exercise
in monkeys on an atherogenic diet. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1483–9.

[7] Shephard RJ, Balady GJ. Exercise as cardiovascular

Circulation 1999;99:963–72.

therapy.

[8] Thompson PD, Buchner D, Piña IL, Balady GJ, Williams MA,
Marcus BH, et al. American Heart Association Council on Clinical
Cardiology Subcommittee on Exercise, Rehabilitation, and Preven-
tion; American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical
Activity, and Metabolism Subcommittee on Physical Activity.
Exercise and physical activity in the prevention and treatment of
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a statement from the Council
on Clinical Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Rehabilitation,
and Prevention) and the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and
Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity). Circulation
2003;107:3109–16.

[9] Lee IM, Sesso HD, Oguma Y, Paffenbarger Jr RS. Relative intensity
of physical activity and risk of coronary heart disease. Circulation
2003;107:1110–6.

[10] Napoli C, Williams-Ignarro S, de Nigris F, Lerman LO, Rossi L,
Guarino C, et al. Long-term combined beneficial effects of physical
training and metabolic treatment on atherosclerosis in hypercholes-
terolemic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:8797–802.

[11] Steinberg D, Witztum JL. Is the oxidative modification hypothesis
relevant to human atherosclerosis? Do the antioxidant trials conducted
to date refute the hypothesis? Circulation 2002;105:2107–11.

[12] Leaf DA, Kleinman M, Hamilton M, Deitrick RW. The exercise-
induced oxidative stress paradox: the effects of physical exercise
training. Am J Med Sci 1999;317:295–300.

[13] Leeuwenburgh C, Heinecke JW. Oxidative stress and antioxidants in

exercise. Curr Med Chem 2001;8:829–38.

[14] de Nigris F, Lerman A, Ignarro LJ, Williams-Ignarro S, Sica V, Baker
AH, et al. Oxidation-sensitive mechanisms, vascular apoptosis and
atherosclerosis. Trends Mol Med 2003;9:351–9.

[15] Napoli C, D'Armiento FP, Mancini FP, Postiglione A, Witztum JL,
Palumbo G, et al. Fatty streak formation occurs in human fetal aortas
and is greatly enhanced by maternal hypercholesterolemia. Intimal
accumulation of low density lipoprotein and its oxidation precede
monocyte recruitment into early atherosclerotic lesions. J Clin Invest
1997;100:2680–90.

[16] Napoli C, Glass CK, Witztum JL, Deutch R, D'Armiento FP,
Palinski W. Influence of maternal hypercholesterolemia during
pregnancy on progression of early atherosclerotic lesions in
childhood: Fate of Early Lesions in Children (FELIC) study. Lancet
1999;354:1234–41.

[17] Laufs U, Wassmann S, Czech T, Munzel T, Eisenhauer M, Bohm
M, et al. Physical inactivity increases oxidative stress, endothelial
dysfunction, and atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
2005;25:809–14.

[18] Kingwell BA. Nitric oxide-mediated metabolic regulation during
exercise: effects of training in health and cardiovascular disease.
FASEB J 2000;14:1685–96.

[19] Stefano GB, Prevot V, Cadet P, Dardik I. Vascular pulsations stimu-
lating nitric oxide release during cyclic exercise may benefit health: a
molecular approach. Int J Mol Med 2001;7:119–29.

[20] de Nigris F, Lerman LO, Williams-Ignarro S, Sica G, Lerman A,
Palinski W, et al. Beneficial effects of antioxidants and L-arginine on

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

oxidation-sensitive gene expression and endothelial nitric oxide
synthase activity at the sites of disturbed shear stress. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2003;100:1420–5.

[21] Boger RH, Bode-Boger SM. The clinical pharmacology of L-

arginine. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2001;41:79–99.

[22] Maxwell AJ, Ho HV, Le CQ, Lin PS, Bernstein D, Cooke JP. L-
arginine enhances aerobic exercise capacity in association with
augmented nitric oxide production. J Appl Physiol 2001;90:933–8.
[23] Fu WJ, Haynes TE, Kohli R, Hu J, Shi W, Spencer TE, et al. Dietary
L-arginine supplementation reduces fat mass in Zucker diabetic fatty
rats. J Nutr 2005;135:714–21.

[24] Kauser K, da Cunha V, Fitch R, Mallari C, Rubanyi GM. Role of
endogenous nitric oxide in progression of atherosclerosis in
apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. Am J Physiol 2000;278:H1679–85.
[25] Aji W, Ravalli S, Szabolcs M, Jiang XC, Sciacca RR, Michler RE, et al.
L-arginine prevents xanthoma development and inhibits atherosclerosis
in LDL receptor knockout mice. Circulation 1997;95:430–7.

[26] Nagaya N, Uematsu M, Oya H, Sato N, Sakamaki F, Kyotani S, et al.
Short-term oral administration of L-arginine improves hemodynamics
and exercise capacity in patients with precapillary pulmonary
hypertension. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:887–91.

[27] Bednarz B, Wolk R, Chamiec T, Herbaczynska-Cedro K, Winek D,
Ceremuzynski L. Effects of oral L-arginine supplementation on
exercise-induced QT dispersion and exercise tolerance in stable
angina pectoris. Int J Cardiol 2000;75:205–10.

[28] Fujita H, Yamabe H, Yokoyama M. Effect of L-arginine administra-
tion on myocardial thallium-201 perfusion during exercise in patients
with angina pectoris and normal coronary angiograms. J Nucl Cardiol
2000;7:97–102.

[29] Napoli C, Ignarro LJ. Nitric oxide-releasing drugs. Annu Rev

Pharmacol Toxicol 2003;43:97–123.

[30] Piatti P, Fragasso G, Monti LD, Setola E, Lucotti P, Fermo I, et al.
Acute intravenous L-arginine infusion decreases endothelin-1 levels
and improves endothelial function in patients with angina pectoris
and normal coronary arteriograms: correlation with asymmetric
dimethylarginine levels. Circulation 2003;107:429–36.

[31] Maxwell AJ, Zapien MP, Pearce GL, MacCallum G, Stone PH.
Randomized trial of a medical food for the dietary management of
chronic, stable angina. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;39:37–45.

[32] Iannuzzi A, Iannuzzo G, Sapio C, Pauciullo P, Iorio D, Spampanato
N, et al. L-arginine improves post-ischemic vasodilation in coronary
heart disease patients taking vasodilating drugs. J Cardiovasc
Pharmacol Ther 2001;6:121–7.

[33] Hambrecht R, Hilbrich L, Erbs S, Gielen S, Fiehn E, Schoene N, et al.
Correction of endothelial dysfunction in chronic heart
failure:
additional effects of exercise training and oral L-arginine supple-
mentation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000;35:706–13.

[34] Stadtman ER. Protein oxidation and aging. Science 1992;257:1220–4.
[35] Halliwell B. Free radicals, antioxidants and human disease: curiosity,

cause or consequence? Lancet 1994;344:721–4.

[36] Ames BN, Gold LS, Willet WC. Causes and prevention of cancer.

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:5258–65.

[37] Ignarro LJ, Napoli C. Novel features on nitric oxide, endothelial nitric
oxide synthase and atherosclerosis. Curr Atheroscl Rep
2004;6:278–87.

[38] Napoli C, Palinski W. Neurodegenerative diseases:

insights into
pathogenic mechanisms from atherosclerosis. Neurobiol Aging
2005;26:293–302.

[39] Crimi E, Sica V, Williams-Ignarro S, Slutsky AS, Zhang H, Ignarro
LJ, et al. The role of oxidative stress in critical illness. Free Rad Biol
Med 2006;40:398–406.

[40] Witztum JL. The oxidation hypothesis of atherosclerosis. Lancet

1994;344:793–5.

[41] Palinski W, Napoli C. The fetal origins of atherosclerosis: maternal
hypercholesterolemia and cholesterol-lowering or antioxidant
treatment during pregnancy influence in utero programming and
post-natal susceptibility to the disease. FASEB J 2002;16:1348–60.

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

337

[42] Armitage JA, Khan IY, Taylor PD, Nathanielsz PW, Poston L.
Developmental programming of the metabolic syndrome by maternal
nutritional imbalance: how strong is the evidence from experimental
models in mammals? J Physiol 2004;561:355–77.

[43] Parthasarathy S. Mechanisms by which dietary antioxidants may

prevent cardiovascular diseases. J Med Food 1998;1:45–51.

[44] Rasmussen KM. The “fetal origins” hypothesis: challenges and opportu-
nities for maternal and child nutrition. Annu Rev Nutr 2001;21:73–95.
[45] Förstermann U, Münzel T. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase in vascular

disease from marvel to menace. Circulation 2006;113:1708–14.

[46] Hayashi T, Juliet PA, Matsui-Hirai H, Miyazaki A, Fukatsu A,
Funami J, et al. l-Citrulline and l-arginine supplementation retards the
progression of high-cholesterol-diet-induced atherosclerosis in
rabbits. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:13681–6.

[47] Vergnani L, Hatrik S, Ricci F, Passaro A, Manzoni N, Zuliani G, et al.
Effect of native and oxidized low-density lipoprotein on endothelial
NO and superoxide production: key role of L-arginine availability.
Circulation 2000;101:1261–6.

[48] Napoli C, Lerman LO, de Nigris F, Loscalzo J, Ignarro LJ. Glycoxidized
low-density lipoprotein downregulates endothelial nitric oxide synthase
in human coronary cells. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;40:1515–22.

[49] Kohlmeier L, Kark JD, Gomez-Garcia E, Martin BC, Steck SE,
Kardinaal AFM, et al. Lycopene and myocardial infarction risk in the
EURAMIC study. Am J Epidemiol 1997;146:618–26.

[50] Agarwal S, Rao AV. Carotenoids and chronic diseases. Drug Metab

Drug Interac 2000;17:189–209.

[51] Zock P, Katan MB. Diet, LDL oxidation, and coronary artery disease.

Am J Clin Nutr 1998;68:759–60.

[52] Virtamo J, Rapola JM, Ripatti S, Heinonen OP, Taylor PR, Albanrs D,
et al. Effect of vitamin E and β-carotene on the incidence of primary
nonfatal myocardial infarction and fatal coronary heart disease. Arch
Intern Med 1998;158:668–765.

[53] Stephens NG, Parsons A, Schodiel PM, Kelly F, Cheeseman K,
Mitchinson MJ. Randomised controlled trial of vitamin E in patients
with coronary disease: Cambridge Heart Antioxidant Study (CHAOS).
Lancet 1996;347:781–6.

[54] Yusuf S, Sleight P, Pogue J, Bosch J, Davies R, Dagenais G. Effects of
an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovas-
cular events in high-risk patients. The Heart Outcomes Prevention
Evaluation Study Investigators. N Engl J Med 2000;342:145–53.

[55] Lonn E, Yusuf S, Hoogwerf B, Pogue J, Yi Q, Zinman B, et al. HOPE
Study; MICRO-HOPE Study. Effects of vitamin E on cardiovascular
and microvascular outcomes in high-risk patients with diabetes:
results of the HOPE study and MICRO-HOPE substudy. Diabetes
Care 2002;25:1919–27.

[56] Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart
Protection Study of antioxidant vitamin supplementation in 20,536
high-risk individuals: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
2002;360:23–33.

[57] Schulman SP, Becker LC, Kass DA, Champion HC, Terrin ML,
Forman S, et al. L-arginine therapy in acute myocardial infarction: the
Vascular Interaction With Age in Myocardial Infarction (VINTAGE
MI) randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2006;295:58–64.

[58] Lonn E, Yusuf S, Arnold MJ, Sheridan P, Pogue J, Micks M, et al.
Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) 2 Investigators.
Homocysteine lowering with folic acid and B vitamins in vascular
disease. N Engl J Med 2006;354:1567–77.

[59] Britton G. Structure and properties of carotenoids in relation to

function. FASEB J 1995;9:1551–8.

[60] Di Mascio P, Kaiser S, Sies H. Lycopene as the most effective
biological carotenoid singlet oxygen quencher. Arch Biochem
Biophys 1989;274:532–8.

[61] Arab L, Steck S. Lycopene and cardiovascular disease. Am J Clin

Nutr 2000;71:1691S–5S [Suppl].

[62] Kohlmeier L, Hastings SB. Epidemiologic evidence of a role of
carotenoids in cardiovascular disease prevention. Am J Clin Nutr
1995;62:1370S–6S [Suppl].

[63] Rao AV, Agarwal S. Role of antioxidant lycopene in cancer and heart

disease. J Am Coll Nutr 2000;19:563–9.

[64] Agarwal S, Rao AV. Tomato lycopene and its role in human health

and chronic diseases. Can Med Assoc J 2000;163:739–44.

[65] Dugas TR, Morel DW, Harrison EH. Impact of LDL carotenoid and
alpha-tocopherol content on LDL oxidation by endothelial cells in
culture. J Lipid Res 1998;39:999–1007.

[66] Fuhrman B, Elis A, Aviram M. Hypercholesterolemic effect of
lycopene and β-carotene is related to suppression of cholesterol
synthesis and augmentation of LDL receptor activity in macrophage.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997;233:658–62.

[67] Dugas TR, Morel DW, Harrison EH. Dietary supplementation with
β-carotene, but not with lycopene inhibits endothelial cell-
mediated oxidation of low-density lipoprotein. Free Radic Biol
Med 1999;26:1238–44.

[68] Street DA, Comstock GW, Salkeld RM, Achuep W, Klag MJ. Serum
antioxidant and myocardial infarction: are low levels of carotenoids
and alpha-tocopherol risk factors for myocardial infarction? Circu-
lation 1994;90:1154–61.

[69] Gomez-Aracena J, Sloots J, Garcia-Rodriguez A. Antioxidants in adipose
tissue and myocardial infarction in Mediterranean area. The EURAMIC
study in Malaga. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 1997;7:376–82.

[70] Iribarren C, Folsom AR, Jacobs DR, Cross MD, Belcher JD,
Eckfeldt JH. Association of serum vitamin levels, LDL suscep-
tibility to oxidation, and autoantibodies against MDA-LDL with
carotid atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
1997;17:1171–7.

[71] Kritenson M, Zieden B, Kucinskiene Z, Elinder LS, Bergdahl B,
Elwing B, et al. Antioxidant state and mortality from coronary heart
disease in Lithuanian and Swedish men: concomitant cross sectional
study of men aged 50. Br Med J 1997;314:629–33.

[72] Schmidt R, Fazekas F, Hayn M, Schmidt H, Kapeller P, Toob G, et al.
Risk factors for microangiopathy-related cerebral damage in Austrian
stroke prevention study. J Neurol Sci 1997;152:15–21.

[73] Rao AV, Agarwal S. Effect of diet and smoking on serum lycopene

and lipid peroxidation. Nutr Res 1998;18:713–21.

[74] Rao AV, Agarwal S. Bioavailability and in vivo antioxidant properties
of lycopene from tomato products and their possible role in the
prevention of cancer. Nutr Cancer 1998;31:199–203.

[75] Agarwal S, Rao AV. Tomato lycopene and low density lipoprotein
oxidation: a human dietary intervention study. Lipids 1988;33:981–4.
[76] Manach C, Scalbert A, Morand C, Rémésy C, Jimenez L.
Polyphenols: food sources and bioavailability. Am J Clin Nutr
2004;79:727–47.

[77] Scalbert A, Williamson G. Dietary intake and bioavailability of

polyphenols. J Nutr 2000;130:2073S–85S.

[78] Gutteridge JM, Halliwell B. Free radicals and antioxidants in the year
look to the future. Ann N Y Acad Sci

2000. A historical
2000;899:136–47.

[79] Scalbert A, Manach C, Morand C, Remesy C, Jimenez L. Dietary
polyphenols and the prevention of diseases. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr
2005;45:287–306.

[80] WHO/FAO. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of chronic diseases.

Geneva: World Health Organization; 2003.

[81] Vita JA. Polyphenols and cardiovascular disease: effects on
endothelial and platelet function. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:292S–7S
[suppl].

[82] Keen CL, Holt RR, Oteiza PI, Fraga CG, Schmitz HH. Cocoa
antioxidants and cardiovascular health. Am J Clin Nutr
2005;81:298S–303S [suppl].

[83] Sies H, Schewe T, Heiss C, Kelm M. Cocoa polyphenols and
inflammatory mediators. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:304S–12S [suppl].
[84] Arts ICW, Hollman PCH. Polyphenols and disease risk in
epidemiologic studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:317S–25S [suppl].
[85] Lambert JD, Hong J, Yang G, Liao J, Yang CS. Inhibition of
carcinogenesis by polyphenols: evidence from laboratory investiga-
tions. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;81:284S–91S.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

338

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

[86] Cemeroglu B, Artik N, Erbas S. Extraction and composition of

pomegranate juice. Fluessiges Obst 1992;59:335–40.

[87] El-Nemr SE, Ismail IA, Ragab M. Chemical composition of the
polyphenolic content of pomegranate peel. Nahrung 1990;34:601–6.
[88] Narr Ben C, Ayed N, Metche M. Quantitative determination of the
polyphenolic content of pomegranate peel. Z Lebensm-Unters
-Forsch, A Eur Food Res Technol 1996;203:374–8.

[89] Shubert YS, Lansky EP, Neeman I. Antioxidant and eicosanoid
enzyme inhibition properties of pomegranate seed oil and fermented
juice flavonoids. J Ethnopharmacol 1999;66:11–7.

[90] Gil MI, Tomas-Barberan FA, Hess-Pierce B, Holcroft DM, Kader
AA. Antioxidant activity of pomegranate juice and its relationship
with phenolic composition and processing. J Agric Food Chem
2000;48:4581–9.

[91] Aviram M, Dornfeld L, Rosenblat M, Volkova N, Kaplan M,

Coleman R, et al. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:1062–76.

[92] Rosenblat M, Draganov D, Watson CE, Bisgaier CL, La Du BN,
Aviram M. Mouse macrophage paraoxonase 2 activity is increased
whereas cellular paraoxonase 3 activity is decreased under oxidative
stress. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003;23:468–74.

[93] de Nigris F, Williams-Ignarro S, Lerman LO, Crimi E, Botti C,
Mansueto G, et al. Beneficial effects of pomegranate juice on
oxidation-sensitive genes and endothelial nitric oxide synthase
activity at sites of perturbed shear stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2005;102:4896–901.

[94] Ignarro LJ, Cirino G, Casini A, Napoli C. Nitric oxide as a signaling
molecule in the vascular system: an overview. J Cardiovasc
Pharmacol 1999;34:879–86.

[95] Napoli C, Ignarro LJ. Nitric oxide and atherosclerosis. Nitric Oxide

2001;5:88–97.

[96] Kaplan M, Hayek T, Raz A, Coleman R, Dornfeld L, Vaya J, et al.
Pomegranate juice supplementation to atherosclerotic mice reduces
macrophage lipid peroxidation, cellular cholesterol accumulation and
development of atherosclerosis. J Nutr 2001;131:2082–9.

[97] Aviram M, Dornfeld L, Kaplan M, Coleman R, Gaitini D, Nitecki S,
et al. Pomegranate juice flavonoids inhibit low-density lipoprotein
oxidation and cardiovascular diseases: studies in atherosclerotic mice
and in humans. Drugs Exp Clin Res 2002;28:49–62.

[98] Hayek T, Fuhrman B, Vaya J, Rosenblat M, Belinky P, Coleman R, et
al. Reduced progression of atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-
deficient mice following consumption of red wine, or its polyphenols
quercetin or catechin, is associated with reduced susceptibility of
LDL to oxidation and aggregation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
1997;17:2744–52.

[99] Aviram M, Fuhrman B. Polyphenolic flavonoids inhibit macrophage-
mediated oxidation of LDL and attenuate atherogenesis. Atheroscle-
rosis 1998;137:S45–50.

[100] Aviram M, Dornfeld L. Pomegranate juice consumption inhibits
serum angiotensin converting enzyme activity and reduces systolic
blood pressure. Atherosclerosis 2001;158:195–8.

[101] Aviram M, Rosenblat M, Gaitini D, Nitecki S, Hoffman A, Dornfeld L,
et al. Pomegranate juice consumption for 3 years by patients with
carotid artery stenosis reduces common carotid intima-media thickness,
blood pressure and LDL oxidation. Clin Nutr 2004;23:423–33.

[102] Lou FQ, Zhang MF, Zhang XG, Liu JM, Yuan WL. A study on tea-
in prevention of atherosclerosis. Chin Med J Engl

pigment
1989;102:579–83.

[103] Duffy SJ, Keaney Jr JF, Holbrook M, Gokce N, Swerdloff PL, Frei B,
Vita JA. Short- and long-term black tea consumption reverses
endothelial dysfunction in patients with coronary artery disease.
Circulation 2001;104:151–6.

[104] Chou EJ, Keevil JG, Aeschlimann S, Wiebe DA, Folts JD, Stein JH.
Effect of ingestion of purple grape juice on endothelial function in
patients with coronary heart disease. Am J Cardiol 2001;88:553–5.
[105] de Nigris F, Lerman LO, Condorelli M, Lerman A, Napoli C.
Oxidation-sensitive transcription factors and molecular mechanisms
in the arterial wall. Antioxid Redox Signal 2001;3:1119–30.

[106] de Nigris F, Williams-Ignarro S, Botti C, Sica V, Ignarro LJ, Napoli C.
Pomegranate juice reduces oxidized low-density lipoprotein down-
regulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase in human coronary
endothelial cells. Nitric Oxide Jan 11 2006 [Epub ahead of print].

[107] Ignarro LJ, Byrns RE, Sumi D, de Nigris F, Napoli C. Pomegranate
juice protects nitric oxide against oxidative destruction and enhances
the biological actions of nitric oxide. Nitric Oxide Apr 18 2006 [Epub
ahead of print].

[108] Rosenblat M, Volkova N, Coleman R, Aviram M. Pomegranate
byproduct administration to apolipoprotein e-deficient mice attenu-
ates atherosclerosis development as a result of decreased macrophage
oxidative stress and reduced cellular uptake of oxidized low-density
lipoprotein. J Agric Food Chem 2006;54:1928–35.

[109] Adams LS, Seeram NP, Aggarwal BB, Takada Y, Sand D, Heber D.
Pomegranate juice, total pomegranate ellagitannins, and punicalagin
suppress inflammatory cell signaling in colon cancer cells. J Agric
Food Chem 2006;54:980–5.

[110] Rozenberg O, Howell A, Aviram M. Pomegranate juice sugar fraction
reduces macrophage oxidative state, whereas white grape juice sugar
fraction increases it. Atherosclerosis 2005 [Epub ahead of print].

[111] Fuhrman B, Volkova N, Aviram M. Pomegranate juice inhibits
oxidized LDL uptake and cholesterol biosynthesis in macrophages.
J Nutr Biochem 2005;16:570–6.

[112] Rosenblat M, Hayek T, Aviram M. Anti-oxidative effects of
pomegranate juice (PJ) consumption by diabetic patients on serum
and on macrophages. Atherosclerosis Oct 11 2005 [Epub ahead of
print].

[113] Sumner MD, Elliott-Eller M, Weidner G, Daubenmier JJ, Chew MH,
Marlin R, et al. Effects of pomegranate juice consumption on myo-
cardial perfusion in patients with coronary heart disease. Am J Cardiol
2005;96:810–4.

[114] King DE. Dietary fiber, inflammation, and cardiovascular disease.

Mol Nutr Food Res 2005;49:594–600.

[115] Stampfer MJ, Hu FB, Manson JE, Rimm EB, Willet WC. Primary
prevention of coronary heart disease in women through diet and
lifestyle. N Engl J Med 2000;343:16–22.

[116] Lairon D, Arnault N, Bertrais S, Planells R, Clero E, Hercberg S, et al.
Dietary fiber intake and risk factors for cardiovascular disease in
French adults. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82:1185–94.

[117] Olendzki B, Speed C, Domino FJ. Nutritional assessment and
counseling for prevention and treatment of cardiovascular disease.
Am Fam Phys 2006;73:257–64.

[118] Ding EL, Mozaffarian D. Optimal dietary habits for the prevention of

stroke. Semin Neurol 2006;26:11–23.

[119] Harper CR, Jacobson TA. Beyond the Mediterranean diet: the role of
omega-3 fatty acids in the prevention of coronary heart disease. Prev
Cardiol 2003;6:136–46.

[120] Bhattacharya A, Sun D, Rahman M, Fernandes G. Different ratios of
eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic omega-3 fatty acids in
commercial fish oils differentially alter pro-inflammatory cytokines
in peritoneal macrophages from C57BL/6 female mice. J Nutr
Biochem 2006 [Epub ahead of print].

[121] Ferrucci L, Cherubini A, Bandinelli S, Bartali B, Corsi A, Lauretani F,
et al. Relationship of plasma polyunsaturated fatty acids to circulating
inflammatory markers. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006;91:439–46.

[122] De Caterina R, Massaro M. Omega-3 fatty acids and the regulation of
expression of endothelial pro-atherogenic and pro-inflammatory
genes. J Membr Biol 2005;206:103–16.

[123] Abedin M, Lim J, Tang TB, Park D, Demer LL, Tintut Y. N-3 fatty
acids inhibit vascular calcification via the p38-mitogen-activated
protein kinase and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
pathways. Circ Res 2006;98:727–9.

[124] Xiao YF, Sigg DC, Leaf A. The antiarrhythmic effect of n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids: modulation of cardiac ion channels as a
potential mechanism. J Membr Biol 2005;206:141–54.

[125] DeFilippis AP, Sperling LS. Understanding omega-3's. Am Heart J

2006;151:564–70.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

339

[126] Iso H, Kobayashi M, Ishihara J, Sasaki S, Okada K, Kita Y. Intake of
fish and n3 fatty acids and risk of coronary heart disease among
Japanese. Circulation 2006;113:195–202.

[127] Harper CR, Jacobson TA. Usefulness of omega-3 fatty acids and the
prevention of coronary heart disease. Am J Cardiol 2005;96:1521–9.
[128] Baer DJ, Judd JT, Clevidence BA, Tracy RP. Dietary fatty acids affect
plasma markers of inflammation in healthy men fed controlled diets: a
randomized crossover study. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;79:969–73.

[129] Lichtenstein AH, Erkkila AT, Lamarche B, Schwab US, Jalbert SM,
Ausman LM. Influence of hydrogenated fat and butter on CVD risk
factors: remnant-like particles, glucose and insulin, blood pressure
and C-reactive protein. Atherosclerosis 2003;171:97–107.

[130] Han NS, Leka LS, Lichtenstein AH, Ausman LM, Schaefer EJ,
Meydani SN. Effect of hydrogenated and saturated, relative to
polyunsaturated, fat on immune and inflammatory responses of adults
with moderate hypercholesterolemia. J Lipid Res 2002;43:445–52.
[131] Nappo F, Esposito K, Cioffi M, Giugliano G, Molinari AM, Paolisso
G, et al. Postprandial endothelial activation in healthy subjects and in
type 2 diabetic patients: role of fat and carbohydrate meals. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2002;39:1145–50.

[132] Michalsen A, Lehmann N, Pithan C, Knoblauch NTM, Moebus S,
Kannenberg F, et al. Mediterranean diet has no effect on markers of
inflammation and metabolic risk factors in patients with coronary
artery disease. Eur J Clin Nutr 2005;23:1–8.

[133] Esposito K, Marfella R, Ciotola M, Di Palo C, Giugliano F, Giugliano
G, et al. Effect of a Mediterranean-style diet on endothelial
dysfunction and markers of vascular inflammation in the metabolic
syndrome. JAMA 2004;292:1440–6.

[134] Bemelmans WJ, Lefrandt JD, Feskens EJ, van Haelst PL, Broer J,
Meyboom-de Jong B, et al. Increased alpha-linolenic acid intake
lowers C-reactive protein, but has no effect on markers of
atherosclerosis. Eur J Clin Nutr 2004;58:1083–9.

[135] Zhao G, Etherton TD, Martin KR, West SG, Gillies PJ, Kris-Etherton
PM. Dietary-linolenic acid reduces inflammatory and lipid cardio-
vascular risk factors in hypercholesterolemic men and women. J Nutr
2004;134:2991–7.

[136] Vega-Lopez S, Kaul N, Devaraj S, Cai RY, German B, Jialal I.
Supplementation with omega3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and all-rac
alpha-tocopherol alone and in combination failed to exert an anti-
inflammatory effect in human volunteers. Metabolism 2004;53:236–40.
[137] Jellema A, Plat J, Mensink RP. Weight reduction, but not a moderate
intake of fish oil, lowers concentrations of inflammatory markers and
PAI-1 antigen in obese men during the fasting and postprandial state.
Eur J Clin Invest 2004;34:766–73.

[138] Geelen A, Brouwer IA, Schouten EG, Kluft C, Katan MB, Zock PL.
Intake of n-3 fatty acids from fish does not lower serum concen-
trations of C-reactive protein in healthy subjects. Eur J Clin Nutr
2004;58:1440–2.

[139] Rallidis LS, Paschos G, Liakos GK, Velissaridou AH, Anastasiadis G,
Zampelas A. Dietary-linolenic acid decreases C-reactive protein,
serum amyloid A and interleukin-6 in dyslipidaemic patients.
Atherosclerosis 2003;167:237–342.

[140] Mori TA, Woodman RJ, Burke V, Puddey IB, Croft KD, Beilin LJ.
Effect of eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid on
oxidative stress and inflammatory markers in treated-hypertensive
type 2 diabetic subjects. Free Radic Biol Med 2003;35:772–81.

[141] Ciubotaru I, Lee YS, Wander RC. Dietary fish oil decreases C-
reactive protein, interleukin-6, and triacylglycerol to HDL-cholesterol
ratio in postmenopausal women on HRT. J Nutr Biochem
2003;14:513–21.

[142] Chan DC, Watts GF, Barrett PH, Beilin LJ, Mori TA. Effect of
atorvastatin and fish oil on plasma high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
concentrations in individuals with visceral obesity. Clin Chem
2002;48:877–83.

[143] Smedman A, Basu S, Jovinge S, Fredrikson GN, Vessby B.
Conjugated linoleic acid increased C-reactive protein in human
subjects. Br J Nutr 2005;94:791–5.

[144] Moloney F, Yeow TP, Mullen A, Nolan JJ, Roche HM. Conjugated
linoleic acid supplementation,
insulin sensitivity, and lipoprotein
metabolism in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am J Clin Nutr
2004;80:887–95.

[145] Riserus U, Basu S, Jovinge S, Fredrikson GN, Arnlov J, Vessby B.
Supplementation with conjugated linoleic acid causes isomer-depen-
dent oxidative stress and elevated C-reactive protein: a potential link to
fatty acid-induced insulin resistance. Circulation 2002;106:1925–9.

[146] Rakotovao A, Berthonneche C, Guiraud A, de Lorgeril M, Salen P, de
Leiris J. Ethanol, wine, and experimental cardioprotection in
ischemia/reperfusion: role of the prooxidant/antioxidant balance.
Antioxid Redox Signal 2004;6:431–8.

[147] Rimm EB, Fosher K, Criqui M, Stampfer MJ. Moderate alcohol
intake and lower risk of coronary heart disease: meta-analysis of
effects on lipids and haemostatic factors. BMJ 1999;319:1523–8.

[148] Ruf J. Alcohol, wine and platelet function. Biol Res 2004;37:209–15.
[149] de Lorgeril M, Salen P. Wine ethanol, platelets, and Mediterranean

diet. Lancet 1999;353:1067.

[150] Abou-agaga LH, Khooa NK, Binsacka R, White CR, Darley-Usmare V,
Grenett HE, et al. Evidence of cardiovascular protection by mod-
erate alcohol: role of nitric oxide. Free Rad Biol Med 2005;39:
540–8.

[151] de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL, Boucher F, Paillard F, de Leiris J.
Wine drinking and risks of cardiovascular complications after recent
acute myocardial infarction. Circulation 2002;106:1465–9.

[152] Guiraud A, de Lorgeril M, Boucher F, Rakotovao A, Berthonneche C,
de Leiris J. Cardioprotective effect of low dose ethanol drinking:
insights into the concept of ethanol preconditioning. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 2004;36:561–6.

[153] Pagel PS, Kersten JR, Warltier DC. Mechanisms of myocardial
protection produced by chronic ethanol consumption. Pathophysiol-
ogy 2004;10:121–9.

[154] Krenz M, Cohen MV, Downey JM. Protective and anti-protective
effects of acute ethanol exposure in myocardial ischemia/reperfusion.
Pathophysiology 2004;10:113–9.

[155] Sato M, Maulik N, Das DK. Cardioprotection with alcohol: role of
both alcohol and polyphenolic antioxidants. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2002;957:122–35.

[156] Vuori IM. Health benefits of physical activity with special reference

to interaction with diet. Public Health Nutr 2001;4:517–28.

[157] Lakka TA, Venäläinen JM, Rauramaa R, Salonen R, Tuomilehto J,
Salonen JT. Relation of leisure-time physical activity and cardiore-
spiratory fitness to the risk of acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J
Med 1994;330:1549–54.

[158] Adams V, Linke A, Krankel N, Erbs S, Gielen S, Mobius-Winkler S,
et al. Impact of regular physical activity on the NAD(P)H oxidase and
angiotensin receptor system in patients with coronary artery disease.
Circulation 2005;111:555–62.

[159] Greiner A, Esterhammer R, Messner H, Biebl M, Muhlthaler H,
Fraedrich G, et al. High-energy phosphate metabolism during
incremental calf exercise in patients with unilaterally symptomatic
peripheral arterial disease measured by phosphor 31 magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. J Vasc Surg 2006;43:978–86.

[160] Tanasescu M, Leitzmann MF, Rimm EB, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ,
Hu FB. Exercise type and intensity in relation to coronary heart
disease in men. JAMA 2002;288:1994–2000.

[161] Fletcher GF, Balady G, Amsterdam EA, Chaitman B, Eckel R, Fleg J.
Exercise standards for testing and training: a statement for healthcare
professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation
2001;104:1694–740.

[162] Bonzheim KA, Franklin BA. Women and heart disease: role of
exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med 2001;3:
135–44.

[163] Williams MA, Fleg JL, Ades PA, Chaitman BR, Miller NH,
Mohiuddin SM, et al. American Heart Association Council on
Clinical Cardiology Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilita-
tion, and Prevention. Secondary prevention of coronary heart disease

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

340

L.J. Ignarro et al. / Cardiovascular Research 73 (2007) 326–340

in the elderly (with emphasis on patients 75 years of age): an
American Heart Association scientific statement from the Council on
Clinical Cardiology Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilita-
tion and Prevention. Circulation 2002;105:1735–43.

[164] Piña IL, Epstein CS, Balady GJ, Belardinelli R, Chaitman BR, Duscha
BD, et al. American Heart Association Committee on exercise,
rehabilitation, and prevention. Exercise and heart failure: a statement
from the American Heart Association Committee on Exercise,
Rehabilitation, and Prevention. Circulation 2003;107:1210–25.

[165] Gordon NF, Gulanick M, Costa F, Fletcher G, Franklin BA, Roth EJ,
et al. American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology,
Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention;
the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; the Council on Nutrition,
Physical Activity, and Metabolism; and the Stroke Council. Physical
activity and exercise recommendations for stroke survivors: an
American Heart Association scientific statement from the Council on
Clinical Cardiology, Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilita-
tion, and Prevention; the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; the
Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism; and the
Stroke Council. Circulation 2004;109:2031–41.

[166] Stewart KJ, Hiatt WR, Regensteiner JG, Hirsch AT. Exercise training

for claudication. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1941–51.

[167] Franklin BA, Bonzheim K, Gordon S, Timmis GC. Safety of
medically supervised cardiac rehabilitation exercise therapy: a 16-
year follow-up. Chest 1998;114:902–6.

[168] Leon AS, Franklin BA, Costa F, Balady GJ, Berra KA, Stewart KJ,
et al. Statement
from the Council on Clinical cardiology
(Subcommitee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention)
and the Coucil on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism
(Subcommetee on Physical Activity), in Collaboration with the
American Association of Cardiovasculaar and Pulmonary Rehabil-
itation. Circulation 2005;111:369–76.

[169] Ades PA. Cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention of

coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med 2001;345:892–902.

[170] Stewart KJ, Turner KL, Bacher AC, DeRegis JR, Sung J, Tayback M,
et al. Are fitness, activity, and fatness associated with health-related
quality of life and mood in older persons? J Cardiopulm Rehabil
2003;23:115–21.

[171] Pollock ML, Franklin BA, Balady GJ, Chaitman BL, Fleg JL,
Fletcher B, et al. AHA Science Advisory. Resistance exercise in
individuals with and without cardiovascular disease: benefits,
rationale, safety, and prescription: an advisory from the Committee
on Exercise, Rehabilitation, and Prevention, Council on Clinical
Cardiology, American Heart Association; position paper endorsed by
the American College of Sports Medicine. Circulation 2000;101:
828–33.

[172] Mark DB, Lauer MS. Exercise capacity: the prognostic variable that

doesn't get enough respect. Circulation 2003;108:1534–6.

[173] Myers J, Prakash M, Froelicher V, Do D, Partington S, Atwood JE.
Exercise capacity and mortality of men referred for exercise testing. N
Engl J Med 2002;346:793–801.

[174] Kavanagh T, Mertens DJ, Hamm LF, Beyene J, Kennedy J, Corey P,
et al. Prediction of long-term prognosis in 12 169 men referred for
cardiac rehabilitation. Circulation 2002;106:666–71.

[175] Kavanagh T, Mertens DJ, Hamm LF, Beyene J, Kennedy J, Corey P,
et al. Peak oxygen intake and cardiac mortality in women referred for
cardiac rehabilitation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42:2139–43.

[176] Smart N, Marwick TH. Exercise training for patients with heart
failure: a systematic review of factors that improve mortality and
morbidity. Am J Med 2004;116:693–706.

[177] Warburton DE, Gledhill N, Quinney A. The effects of changes in
musculoskeletal fitness on health. Can J Appl Physiol 2001;26:
161–216.

[178] Warburton DE, Gledhill N, Quinney A. Musculoskeletal fitness and

health. Can J Appl Physiol 2001;26:217–37.

[179] Leger LA, Mercier D, Gadoury C, Lambert J. The multistage 20
metre shuttle run test for aerobic fitness. J Sports Sci 1988;6:93–101.
[180] American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM's Guidelines for
exercise testing and prescription. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 2000.

[181] American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM's Guidelines for
exercise testing and prescription. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 2000. p. 225.

[182] Miller WC, Wallace JP, Eggert KE. Predicting max HR and the HR-
VO2 relationship for exercise prescription in obesity. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 1993;25:1077–81.

[183] Wannamethee SG, Shaper AG, Walker M. Physical activity and
mortality in older men with diagnosed coronary heart disease.
Circulation 2000;102:1358–63.

[184] American College of Sports Medicine. Position stand: the recom-
mended quantity and quality of exercise for developing and
maintaining cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness, and flexibility
in healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1998;30:975–91.

[185] Shephard RJ. Absolute versus relative intensity of physical activity in
a dose–response context. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001;33:S400–18
[discussion S493-4].

[186] Warburton DE, Sheel AW, Hodges AN, Stewart IB, Yoshida EM,
Levy RD. Effects of upper extremity exercise training on peak aerobic
and anaerobic fitness in patients after transplantation. Am J Cardiol
2004;93:939–43.

[187] Swain DP, Franklin BA. VO(2) reserve and the minimal intensity for
improving cardiorespiratory fitness. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2002;34:152–7.

[188] Physical activity and health: a report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta:
US Department of Health and Human Services, US Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion; 1996.

[189] Nieman DC. Exercise testing and prescription: a health-related

approach. 4th ed. London: Mayfield Publishing Company; 1999.

[190] Lee IM, Skerrett PJ. Physical activity and all-cause mortality: what is
the dose–response relation? Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001;33:S459–71
[discussion S493-4].

[191] Myers J, Kaykha A, George S, Abella J, Zaheer N, Lear S, et al.
Fitness versus physical activity patterns in predicting mortality in
men. Am J Med 2004;117:912–8.

[192] Borg G. Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Med Sci Sports

Exerc 1982;14:377–87.

[193] Noble BJ, Borg GA, Jacobs I, Ceci R, Kaiser P. A category-ratio
perceived exertion scale: relationship to blood and muscle lactates
and heart rate. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1983;15:523–8.

[194] Hambrecht R, Niebauer J, Marburger C, Grunze M, Kalberer B,
Hauer K, et al. Various intensities of leisure time physical activity in
patients with coronary artery disease: effects on cardiorespiratory
fitness and progression of coronary atherosclerotic lesions. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1993;22:468–77.

[195] Franklin BA, Swain DP, Shephard RJ. New insights in the prescription
of exercise for coronary patients. J Cardiovasc Nurs 2003;18:116–23.
[196] Warburton DER, Mathur S. Skeletal muscle training in people with
chronic heart failure or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Physiother Can 2004;56:143–57.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article-abstract/73/2/326/486833
by guest
on 20 August 2018

