Review

Types of Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart
Disease: A Critical Review

Frank B. Hu, MD, PhD, JoAnn E. Manson, MD, DrPh, and Walter C. Willett, MD, DrPh

Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts

Key words: dietary fat, saturated fat, monounsaturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, trans fatty acids, n-3 fatty acids,
cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, women

During the past several decades, reduction in fat intake has been the main focus of national dietary
recommendations to decrease risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). Several lines of evidence, however, have
indicated that types of fat have a more important role in determining risk of CHD than total amount of fat in the
diet. Metabolic studies have long established that the type of fat, but not total amount of fat, predicts serum
cholesterol levels. In addition, results from epidemiologic studies and controlled clinical trials have indicated that
replacing saturated fat with unsaturated fat is more effective in lowering risk of CHD than simply reducing total
fat consumption. Moreover, prospective cohort studies and secondary prevention trials have provided strong
evidence that an increasing intake of n-3 fatty acids from fish or plant sources substantially lowers risk of
cardiovascular mortality. In this article, we review evidence from epidemiologic studies and dietary intervention
trials addressing the relationship between dietary fat intake and risk of CHD, with a particular emphasis on
different major types of fat, n-3 fatty acids and the optimal balance between n-3 and n-6 fatty acids. We also
discuss the implications of the available evidence in the context of current dietary recommendations.

Key teaching points:

• In the past several decades, reduction in fat intake has been the main focus of national dietary recommendations to lower risk of

coronary heart disease (CHD).

• Metabolic studies have long established that the type of fat, but not total amount of fat, predicts serum cholesterol levels.
• Results from epidemiologic studies and controlled clinical trials have indicated that replacing saturated fat with unsaturated fat is

more effective in lowering risk of CHD than simply reducing total fat consumption.

• Prospective cohort studies and secondary prevention trials have provided strong evidence that a higher intake of n-3 fatty acids from

fish or plant sources lowers risk of CHD.

• Recent national dietary guidelines have shifted the emphasis from total fat reduction to distinguishing different types of fat.

INTRODUCTION

During the past several decades, reduction in fat intake has
been the main focus of national dietary recommendations. In
the public’s mind, the word “dietary fat” has become synony-
mous with obesity and heart disease, whereas the words “low-
fat” and “fat-free” have become synonymous with heart health.
In response to the low-fat campaign, the food industry has
produced numerous commercial products labeled as “low-fat”
or “fat-free,” but with high amounts of refined carbohydrates
and sugar. Ironically, while dietary fat intake as percentage of

energy intake has declined in the U.S. over the years, total
caloric intake has not declined, and the prevalence of obesity
and type 2 diabetes has grown dramatically [1,2].

It is now increasingly recognized that the low-fat campaign
has been based on little scientific evidence and may have
caused unintended health consequences. It is also increasingly
appreciated that different types of fats have different health
effects. In this article, we review epidemiologic evidence and
dietary intervention studies regarding the relationship between
dietary fat intake and risk of CHD, with particular emphasis on
different major types of fat and n-3 fatty acids.

Address correspondence to: Dr. Frank Hu, Dept. of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, 665 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115. E-mail:
Frank.hu@channing.harvard.edu

Journal of the American College of Nutrition, Vol. 20, No. 1, 5–19 (2001)
Published by the American College of Nutrition

5

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

MAJOR TYPES OF DIETARY FAT

A higher intake of total and saturated fat is widely believed
to contribute to the development of CHD. This belief is largely
based on ecological studies relating dietary intake of saturated
fat and rates of CHD. In the Seven Countries Study [3], intake
of saturated fat as a percentage of calories was strongly corre-
lated with coronary death rates across 16 defined populations in
seven countries (r 5 0.84). Interestingly, the correlation be-
tween the percentage of energy from total fat and CHD inci-
dence was much weaker (r 5 0.39). Indeed, the regions with
the highest CHD rate (Finland) and the lowest rate (Crete) had
the same amount of total fat intake, at about 40% of energy,
which was the highest among the 16 populations. In a more
recent analysis of the Seven Countries Study [4], Kromhout and
colleagues found a strong positive correlation of 25-year death
rates from CHD with intakes of four major long-chain saturated
fatty acids (all r . 0.80) and trans fatty acids (r 5 0.78).

Data from international comparisons as well as migration
studies, although providing evidence for the importance of diet
and environmental factors in the cause of CHD, are inadequate
in testing specific hypotheses regarding the role of individual
dietary components due to confounding by other aspects of
diet, physical activity, smoking, obesity and economic devel-
opment. Prospective cohort studies of individuals, in which diet
is assessed prior to the occurrence of disease, are typically
considered as the strongest nonrandomized design. Despite the
long-standing interest in the diet-heart hypothesis, the number
of cohort studies that have directly addressed associations
between dietary fat intake and risk of CHD is surprisingly small
and the results are not consistent. A significant positive asso-
ciation between saturated fat intake and risk of CHD was found
in two studies [5,6], but not in others [7–13]. A significant
inverse association between polyunsaturated fat
intake and
CHD was found in only one study [11], but not in others
[7–10,12,13]. The interpretation of these findings is compli-
cated by small study size, inadequate dietary assessment, in-
complete adjustment for intake of total energy, failure to ac-
count for trans isomers of unsaturated fats and lack of control
for intakes of other types of fat and other components of diet.
More recently, using 14-year follow-up data from the
Nurses’ Health Study, Hu and colleagues [14] conducted de-
tailed prospective analyses of dietary fat and CHD among
80,082 women aged 34 to 59. The study was particularly
powerful because of large sample sizes and repeated assess-
ments of diet. Hu et al. found a weak positive association
between saturated fat intake and risk of CHD, but a significant
and strong positive association with intake of trans fatty acids.
Five percent of energy from saturated fat, compared with
equivalent energy from carbohydrates, was associated with a 17
percent greater risk of CHD (relative risk 5 1.17, 95 percent
confidence interval 0.97–1.41, p 5 0.10). Compared with
equivalent energy from carbohydrates, the relative risk for two

percent of energy from trans fat was 1.93 (1.43–2.61, p ,
0.001); for five percent of energy from monounsaturated fat,
0.81 (0.65–1.00, p 5 0.05); and for five percent energy from
polyunsaturated fat, 0.62 (0.46 – 0.85, p 5 0.002). Total fat was
intake not significantly related to risk (for five percent energy
1.02, 0.97–1.07, p 5 0.55). It was estimated that replacement of
five percent of energy from saturated fat by unsaturated fats
would reduce risk by 42 percent (23–56, p , 0.001), and
replacement of two percent of energy from trans fat by unhy-
drogenated unsaturated fats would reduce risk 53 percent (34 –
67, p , 0.001) (Fig. 1). These findings challenge the widely
recommended low-fat high-carbohydrate diets because they
suggest that replacing saturated and trans fats with unhydro-
genated unsaturated fats is more effective in preventing CHD
than reducing overall fat intake.

Individual Saturated Fatty Acids

The association between saturated fat and CHD observed in
the Nurses’ Health Study was much weaker than that predicted
by international comparisons [3], but is consistent with the
possibility that the proportional increase in plasma HDL con-
centration produced by saturated fat somewhat compensates for
its adverse effect on LDL level. In metabolic studies, different
classes of saturated fatty acids have different effects on plasma
lipid and lipoprotein levels [15] (Fig. 2). Specifically, saturated
fatty acids with 12–16 carbon atoms tend to increase plasma
total and LDL cholesterol levels, whereas stearic acid (18:0)
does not have a cholesterol-raising effect in comparison with
oleic acid (18:1). Among the cholesterol-raising saturated fatty
acids, myristic acid (14:0) appears to be more potent than lauric

Fig. 1. Estimated changes (% with 95% confidence intervals) in risk of
coronary heart disease (CHD) associated with isocaloric dietary sub-
stitutions. Adjusted for coronary risk factors and total energy intake.
Sat 5 saturated fat, Carbo 5 carbohydrate, Mono 5 monounsaturated
fat, Poly 5 polyunsaturated fat, Trans 5 trans fatty acids, Sat-Carbo 5
substitute carbohydrates for saturated fat. (Reproduced from [14] with
permission of the Massachusetts Medical Society, Copyright © 1997
Massachusetts Medical Society.)

6

VOL. 20, NO. 1

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

risk does not appear to be justified. Moreover, these saturated
fats are highly correlated in typical diets due to shared food
sources (e.g., beef and dairy products).

N-6 Polyunsaturated Fat

Numerous metabolic studies have shown strong cholesterol-
lowering effects for vegetable oils rich in linoleic acid when
substituted for dietary saturated fat [22]. Also, dietary interven-
tion trials using high-polyunsaturated-fat diets have been more
effective than those using low-fat high-carbohydrate diets in
lowering total serum cholesterol as well as rates of CHD
(discussed below) [23]. In prospective cohort studies among
men, a strong inverse association for polyunsaturated fat was
found in the Western Electric Study [11], and borderline sig-
nificant inverse associations were found in the Ireland-Boston
Heart Study [6] and the usual care group of the Multiple Risk
Factor Intervention Trial [24]. The inverse association between
polyunsaturated fat and CHD observed in the Nurses’ Health
Study is consistent with previous findings, but stronger than
predicted by the effects of polyunsaturated fat on blood lipids
alone, based on the Keys [25] and Hegested equations [26]
derived from metabolic studies. This suggests that n-6 polyun-
saturated fat may have other beneficial effects on cardiovascu-
lar disease besides improving lipid profile. In animal and met-
abolic studies, an increased intake of n-6 polyunsaturated fatty
acid improves insulin sensitivity [27,28]. In the Nurses’ Health
Study, a higher intake of n-6 polyunsaturated fat was associated
with a significantly lower incidence of type 2 diabetes [29]. In
addition, animal studies have suggested an anti-arrhythmic
effect when sunflower oil (rich in linoleic acid) was fed [30],
although the effect was less than that when fish oil was fed.

In the Nurses’ Health Study [17], the ratio of polyunsatu-
rated fat to long-chain saturated fatty acids (P:S ratio) was
strongly associated with a lower risk of CHD. After adjustment
for age, smoking, other nondietary variables and intakes of
monounsaturated fat, trans fat, protein and total energy, the RR
of CHD was 0.79 (95% CI 0.70 – 0.89) for each 0.2 unit
increment in the ratio. In the categorical analysis, the multivar-
iate RRs across deciles of the ratio (the median values ranged
from 0.23 to 0.72 from the lowest to highest deciles) were 1.0
(reference), 0.92, 0.90, 0.87, 0.94, 0.81, 0.68, 0.72, 0.58, and
0.58(0.41– 0.83) (p for trend , 0.0001) (Fig. 3). These data
suggest that replacing long chain saturated fat with polyunsat-
urated fat is likely to substantially reduce the risk of CHD. In
addition, when intakes of polyunsaturated and trans fat were
considered together [14], the lowest risk of CHD was observed
among those who were in the lowest quintile of trans fat and
the highest quintile of polyunsaturated fat; the RR comparing
women in this category with those with highest intake of trans
fat and lowest intake of polyunsaturated fat was 0.31 (95% CI
0.11– 0.88). These results indicate a substantial benefit to sub-
stituting polyunsaturated fat (such as unhydrogenated soybean

Fig. 2. Effects of lauric (12:0), myristic (14:0), palmitic (16:0), elaidic
(trans-18:1), stearic (18:0), oleic (cis-18:1), and linoleic (18:2n-6) acids
on total cholesterol (TC), LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) and HDL choles-
terol (HDL-C). (Reproduced from [15] with permission of the Amer-
ican Society for Clinical Nutrition.)

acid (12:0) or palmitic acid (16:0) [15], but the data are not
entirely consistent [16].

Because stearic acid does not raise plasma cholesterol lev-
els, it has been suggested it not be included with saturated fat
on food labels. However, until recently, there has been no study
directly looking at the relationship between stearic acid intake
and risk of CHD. In a recent analysis of the Nurses’ Health
Study [17], Hu and colleagues found that dietary intake of short
to medium chain saturated fatty acids (4:0 –10:0) was not
significantly associated with risk of CHD (relative risk (RR) for
a 1% increase in energy 5 0.97, 95% confidence interval (CI),
0.90 –1.05). In contrast, intakes of longer-chain saturated fatty
acids (12:0 –18:0) were each separately associated with a small
increase in risk. After adjustment for coronary risk factors, the
RR for a 1% energy increase from the stearic acid was 1.19
(1.02–1.37). Due to the high correlations among specific saturated
fats, distinguishing among their relationships with CHD risk was
difficult. Nevertheless, further adjustment for other long-chain
saturates did not appreciably alter the RR for stearic acid.

Although stearic acid has little effect on total and LDL
cholesterol concentrations compared to carbohydrate, it may
lower HDL compared to monounsaturated or polyunsaturated
fatty acids, and the HDL-lowering effect of stearic acid was
particularly strong among women [18]. Aro et al. [19] recently
reported that, compared with myristic and palmitic acids,
stearic acid reduced LDL concentration, but also reduced HDL
level. Thus, the ratios of LDL to HDL and apo B to apo A-I
were not affected. Moreover, stearic acid increased Lp(a) con-
centration [19] and may activate Factor VII [20] and impair
fibrinolysis [21]. These data, along with the findings from the
Nurses’ Health Study, suggest that distinguishing stearic acid
from other saturated fats in dietary advice to reduce coronary

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF NUTRITION

7

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

Fig. 3. Multivariate relative risks of coronary heart disease according to
deciles of the ratio of polyunsaturated to long-chain saturated fatty
acids (P:S ratio). Adjusted for coronary risk factors, other fatty acids
and total energy intake. (Reproduced from [17] with permission of the
American Society for Clinical Nutrition.)

or corn oil) for trans fat (such as hard margarine) in the diet or
other foods high in trans fatty acids.

Monounsaturated Fat

Ecological studies have suggested an inverse association
between monounsaturated fat intake and total mortality, as well
as with CHD death [31]. In particular, the mortality rate from
CHD is very low in the traditional Mediterranean populations
that use olive oil (a major source of oleic acid) as the primary
source of fat [22].

Prospective cohort studies that address the association be-
tween intake of monounsaturated fat and CHD risk are sparse.
Two studies found an increased risk of CHD with a higher
intake of monounsaturated fat in younger, but not older partic-
ipants [32,33]. However, neither study adjusted for intake of
other types of fat. A more recent study found an inverse
association for monounsaturated fat after adjusting for intakes
of other types of fat [12]. Because the main source of mono-
unsaturated fat in the U.S. diet is beef and dairy fats and
partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, intake of monounsatu-
rated fat is strongly correlated with saturated and trans fats.
Thus, the relative risks for monounsaturated fat intake not
adjusted for saturated and trans fats are likely to be seriously
confounded. In the Nurses’ Health Study [14], after adjusting
for other fats, monounsaturated fat intake was inversely asso-
ciated with risk of CHD, although the association was weaker
than that for polyunsaturated fat.

In metabolic studies, replacing carbohydrates with mono-
unsaturated fat raises HDL without affecting LDL [34]. This
replacement may also improve glucose tolerance and insulin sen-
sitivity among patients with diabetes mellitus [35]. In addition,
monounsaturated fat is resistant to oxidative modification [36].

The major non-animal sources of monounsaturated fat include
olive and canola oils, nuts and avocados. Both canola oil and nuts
are also important sources of polyunsaturated fat. In addition,

liquid vegetable oils generally contain a higher amount of vitamin
E, whereas animal fat contain little antioxidants.

Trans Fatty Acids

The positive relationship between trans fat intake and risk
of CHD observed in the Nurses’ Health Study is generally
consistent with several prospective studies conducted in men,
including the Health Professionals’ Follow-up Study [13] and
the Alpha-Tocopherol Beta-Carotene Study [12]. The concen-
tration of trans fatty acids in adipose tissue was not signifi-
cantly associated with risk of myocardial infarction in the
EURAMIC study [37] or with sudden cardiac death in a small
case-control study in the United Kingdom [38]. However, the
95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the relative risks in the
highest categories of trans-fatty acids in both studies were very
wide and included the estimate of relative risk in the Nurses’
Health Study. Also, in the EURAMIC study, after exclusion of
an uninformative area (Spain, where trans fat intake was uni-
formly very low due to high consumption of olive oil), the
relative risk for the highest versus the lowest category (1.44,
95% CI 0.94 –2.20) was close to that in the Nurses’ Health
Study (RR for extreme quintiles 5 1.53, 95% CI 1.16 –2.02).
A higher intake of trans fat can contribute to increased risk
of CHD through multiple mechanisms. First, trans fatty acids
raise LDL cholesterol levels [39 – 42] and lower HDL choles-
terol [39,41,42] relative to cis unsaturated fatty acids. As such,
the increase in the ratio of total to HDL cholesterol for trans fat
is approximately double that for saturated fat [43]. Second,
trans fat increases lipoprotein (a) levels [44,45], which are
positively associated with risk of CHD [46]. Third, trans fat
raises plasma triglyceride levels [47], and increased triglycer-
ides are independently associated with increased risk of CHD
[48,49]. Fourth, trans fatty acids can adversely affect essential
fatty acid metabolism and prostaglandin balance by inhibiting
the enzyme delta-6-desaturase and, as a result, may promote
thrombogenesis [50 –52]. Finally, recent data have suggested
that high intake of trans fat may promote insulin resistance in
humans [28].

The major sources of trans fatty acids in the U.S. are stick
margarine, commercially baked products, and deep fried fast
food. In Europe, virtually all margarines have become trans fat
free due to rapid response by the manufactures to these health
concerns. The change from stick margarine to trans fat free
margarine, however, has been slow in the U.S. On the other
hand, in the U.S., margarine now accounts for only 25 percent
to 37 percent of trans fatty acids; the remainder is “hidden” in
baked goods, fried fast foods, and other prepared foods [53].
For example, a medium-size French fries contains 5– 6 grams,
a doughnut contains 2 grams, and an ounce of crackers contains
2 grams of trans fatty acids [54]. Unfortunately, many of these
products do not need to be labeled under the proposed regula-
tions to label trans fatty acids which are now under consider-
ation by the Food and Drug Administration.

8

VOL. 20, NO. 1

NUT CONSUMPTION AND RISK OF
CHD

Up to 80% of energy in nuts comes from fat. Because of
their high fat content, nuts are traditionally included among
foods to be avoided to lower blood cholesterol and risk of
CHD. However, so far, five large prospective cohort studies
(the Adventist Health Study, the Iowa Women Health Study,
the Nurses’ Health Study, the Physicians’ Health Study and the
Cholesterol and Recurrent Events Study (CARE)) have exam-
ined the relation between nut consumption and risk of CHD,
and all have found an inverse association [55]. In particular,
women in the Nurses’ Health Study who consumed nuts five or
more times a week had significantly lower risk of total CHD
(RR 5 0.65, 95% CI 0.47– 0.89, p for trend 5 0.0009), as
compared to women who rarely ate nuts (never or less than
once a month), after adjusting for age, smoking and other
known CHD risk factors [56]. The magnitude of risk reduction
was similar for fatal CHD (RR 5 0.61, 0.35–1.05, p for trend 5
0.007) and nonfatal MI (RR 5 0.68, 0.47–1.00, p for trend 5
0.04). A similar risk reduction was observed among the partic-
ipants in the Adventist Health Study [57], whose nut consump-
tion is substantially higher than the general U.S. population.

Several clinical studies have evaluated the effects of diets
high in nuts (including walnuts, peanuts, almonds and other
nuts) on blood lipids. In a randomized, controlled study, Sabate
and coworkers [58] randomized 18 normocholesterolemic men
to either a control or a high walnut diet and then switched after
four weeks. Both diets conformed to the National Cholesterol
Education Program Step I diet and were identical in foods and
macronutrients, except that walnuts provided 20% of calories in
the walnut diet (replacing meat, potato chips, oils, margarine
and butter). When compared to the control diet, men in the
walnut diet decreased total and LDL cholesterol levels by 12%
and 16%, respectively. Although there was a slight decrease in
HDL cholesterol level (4.9%) in the walnut diet, the ratio of
LDL cholesterol to HDL cholesterol was significantly lowered
by the walnut diet (12%). A cholesterol-lowering effect was
also observed for diets supplemented with almonds [59,60]. In

Table 1. Fat Composition of Nuts*

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

addition, a low-fat diet supplemented with peanuts significantly
improved serum lipoprotein profiles compared to a regular
low-fat diet among postmenopausal hypercholesterolemic
women [61].

The beneficial effects of nut consumption observed in clin-
ical and epidemiologic studies underscore the importance of
distinguishing different types of fat. Although nuts are high in
fat, the predominant types of fat in nuts are mono- and poly-
unsaturated (Table 1), which lower LDL cholesterol level.
Other potentially protective constituents in nuts include vege-
table protein, magnesium, vitamin E, fiber, and potassium.

Concern may exist that higher consumption of nuts would
result in weight gain due to their relatively high energy density.
Thus, nuts should not simply be added on the top of the diet.
Instead, they should be used to replace other sources of calories
such as red meats or refined carbohydrates.

INTERVENTION TRIALS OF
DIETARY FAT

Clinical Endpoint Trials

Randomized clinical endpoint trials are the “gold standard”
for establishing diet-disease relationships. However, in most
circumstances, dietary trials are infeasible because of practical
considerations, including ethical issues and potential lack of
compliance in the long run. So far, only a handful of dietary
trials with coronary disease endpoints have been conducted and
most of these trials were conducted in men with existing
myocardial infarction. These trials have been reviewed previ-
ously by several authors [62– 64] (Table 2).

Earlier trials have tested two dietary approaches, one to
lower total fat and the other to replace saturated fat with
polyunsaturated fat leaving total fat unchanged. Three of the
trials were primary prevention trials conducted among institu-
tionalized patients to increase control over the diets [65– 67].
Total fat intake was not reduced in these trials; rather, polyun-
saturated fat was greatly increased to substitute for saturated

Total fat, g

Saturated fat, g Mono-unsaturated fat, g

Poly-unsaturated fat, g

Ratio of unsaturated to

saturated fat, g

Almonds (;24 nuts)
Brazil nuts (8 medium nuts)
Cashews (;18 medium nuts)
Hazelnuts (;12 nuts)
Macadamia (;12 nuts)
Peanuts (;35 pieces)
Pecans (;15 halves)
Pistachios (;47 nuts)
Walnuts, English (;14 halves)
Average

14.5
19.0
13.0
18.0
20.0
13.5
19.0
14.0
18.0
16.6

* All values for dried or dry roasted nuts.
Reproduced from [55] courtesy of Current Science, Inc.

1.5
5.0
2.5
1.0
2.5
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.3

10.0
7.0
8.0
15.0
16.5
7.0
12.0
8.0
5.0
9.8

3.0
7.0
2.5
2.0
1.0
4.5
5.0
4.0
11.0
4.4

8.7
2.8
4.2
17.0
7.0
5.8
8.5
6.0
8.0
6.2

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF NUTRITION

9

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

Table 2. Dietary Intervention Trials on Coronary Events

Trial

Subjects in the

intervention group

Dietary

Intervention

Dietary fat
(% energy)

P:S ratio

in the

Duration

in the treatment

treatment

(yrs)

MRC low-fat [71]
DART [72]
Finnish Mental
Hospital [66]

Los Angeles Veteran

[65]

Oslo Diet Heart
Study [68, 69]
MRC soy oil [70]

Minnesota Coronary

Survey [67]

Reduce total fat
123 MI patients, all males
1,015 MI patients, all males Reduce total fat
Unsaturated fat- 3
676 males
Unsaturated fat- 3

424 males, most had no

saturated fat

evidence of existing
heart disease

206 MI patients, all males Unsaturated fat- 3
199 MI patients, all males Unsaturated fat- 3
Unsaturated fat- 3

4,393 men and 4,664

women

saturated fat

saturated fat

saturated fat

saturated fat

Indian Experiment of

204 MI patients, primarily

High fruits,

Infarct Survival
[75]

males

Lyon Diet Heart

302 MI patients, primarily

Study [73]

males

vegetables, nuts,
fish and pulses
Mediterranean diet

group

22%
32%
35%

40%

39%

46%

38%

24%

31%

group

NR
0.8
1.5

NR

2.4

2.0

1.6

1.2

0.7

Change in

serum

cholesterol†

Change in

CHD‡

3
2
6

8

5

4

25%
23.5%
215%

213%

214%

216%

14%
29%
243%

231%

225%

212%

4.5

214%

No change

1

29%

240%

2.3

No change

273%

† Change in cholesterol refers to the percentage change in serum cholesterol in the treatment group compared to the change io the control group.
‡ Change in CHD refers to the percentage difference in coronary event rates in the treatment compared to the control group.
NR: not reported.
Adapted from [64].

fat. In all three trials, serum cholesterol was reduced substan-
tially. In the Los Angeles Veteran Hospital Study [65], CHD
rate was reduced by 31% during eight years of follow-up in the
intervention group, while in the Finnish Mental Hospital study
[66], the reduction of CHD rate was 43% over six years. In both
trials, linoleic acid in adipose tissue (% of total fatty acids)
increased substantially in the treatment group during the study
period, indicating compliance with the prescribed high polyun-
saturated-fat diet by the patients. In the Finnish trial, patients in
the treatment group also substituted soft margarine for stick
margarine. Thus, the reduction in serum cholesterol and CHD
observed in this study was probably in part due to reduction in
trans fat intake. In contrast, in the Minnesota study [67],
cardiovascular events were not significantly reduced by the
treatment diet, although serum cholesterol was reduced by 14%
in the treatment group. However, this study was relatively short
in duration (4.5 years), and the achieved P:S ratio (1.6) was far
below the specified goal (2.5).

Two earlier secondary prevention trials also used high poly-
unsaturated-fat diets. The Oslo Diet-Heart Study, which in-
cluded 21% energy from polyunsaturated fat, found a signifi-
cant reduction in serum cholesterol and major coronary events
(fatal and nonfatal MI) at five years of follow-up [68]. After 11
years, fatal MI was reduced by 44% (p 5 0.004) and total
cardiovascular mortality was reduced by 14% (p 5 0.13) [69].
Another trial [70] using a high amount of soybean oil found a
16% reduction in serum cholesterol at six months and a 12%
(nonsignificant) reduction in the rate of recurrent coronary
events over four years. But deaths from cardiovascular disease

were not affected by the treatment. In contrast to the favorable
results observed in trials using high-polyunsaturated fat diets,
two secondary prevention trials testing the approach of total fat
reduction did not find a significant reduction in serum choles-
terol or CHD events [71,72]. The low-fat intervention group in
the Diet and Reinfarction Trial (DART) [72] was unable to
achieve the goal set for total fat, raising questions about the
compliance of the patients to a low-fat diet.

In the 1990s, two secondary prevention trials using the
whole diet approach instead of modification of the amount of
dietary fat reported favorable results. The Lyon Diet Heart
Study tested the effects of a “Mediterranean” diet enriched with
alpha-linolenic acid compared to a standard low fat diet [73].
The intervention diet included more bread, more fruits and
vegetables, more fish and poultry and less red meat and butter.
After a mean follow-up of 27 months, coronary events were
reduced by 73% in the treatment group and total mortality was
reduced by 70%. The benefit of the intervention diet was
maintained up to four years after the first infarction [74].
Interestingly, blood lipids were not affected by the intervention,
but blood levels of n-3 fatty acids, especially alpha-linolenic
acid and anti-oxidant vitamins increased significantly in the
treatment group.

The Indian Heart Study [75] tested a semi-vegetarian diet
enriched with fruits, vegetables, whole grains and nuts among
patients during hospitalization with acute myocardial infarc-
tion. After 12 weeks of treatment, coronary events were re-
duced by 36%, and at the end of trial (one year), coronary death
was reduced by 41% and nonfatal MI by 38%. In the meantime,

10

VOL. 20, NO. 1

serum cholesterol decreased by 8%, systolic blood pressure
decreased by 8 mmHg, diastolic decreased by 6 mmHg and
body weight decreased by 4 kg.

In both trials, total fat intake did not appreciably change. The
success of these trials indicates that the right types of fatty acids
and other components of diet are more important than total amount
of fat in reducing coronary risk. These trials also support the
clinical utility of the overall dietary pattern approach in the pre-
vention of CHD. However, in these trials, it is not possible to
determine which of the nutritional changes were responsible for
the observed reduction in CHD. Also, both trials were conducted
in myocardial infarction patients, and these diets have not yet been
tested in the primary prevention of CHD.

Angiographic Trials

Several angiographic trials have examined the effects of
dietary intervention on progression of coronary atherosclerosis.
In an uncontrolled trial (The Leiden Intervention Trial), Arnt-
zenius and coworkers [76] tested a vegetarian diet with a high
ratio of polyunsaturated fat to saturated fat (P:S 5 2) among 39
patients with stable angina pectoris. There was a significant
retardation in coronary lesion growth after two years, which
was primarily attributed to improved lipid profile. During the
intervention, participants’ linoleic acid content of cholesteryl
esters significantly increased. The St. Thomas Atherosclerosis
Regression Study (STARS) [77] tested the effects of a dietary
intervention with a moderate amount of total fat (27% energy)
but relatively high polyunsaturated fat (8% energy). The dietary
intervention alone significantly reduced overall progression of
coronary narrowing and increased overall regression of coro-
nary artery disease. Adding a cholesterol-lowering medication,
cholestyramine, to the dietary intervention further reduced the
progression of coronary atherosclerosis.

The combined effects of diet and lifestyle modification on
the progression of atherosclerosis have been investigated in
several studies. In the Lifestyle Heart Study, Ornish and col-
leagues [78] assigned 28 MI patients to an intervention group
with low-fat, strict vegetarian diet, exercise, stress management
and yoga and 20 patients to a usual care group. After one year,
blood cholesterol was lowered by 19% and the average percent
diameter stenosis was reduced by 5.6% in the intervention
group, as compared with the control group. At year five [79],
coronary atherosclerosis continued to regress in the experimen-
tal group, but to progress in the control group, and significantly
more “cardiac events” (MI, percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty, coronary artery bypass graft, cardiac hospitaliza-
tion, deaths) occurred in the control group. The number of
“hard endpoints” (MI and deaths), however, was too small to
allow for meaningful analyses. Interestingly, in the control
group coronary stenosis worsened (28% relative worsening)
despite substantial reduction in fat intake (from 31% of energy
to 25% of energy) and LDL cholesterol (19% reduction). Thus,
it is not clear whether the low-fat dietary component contrib-
uted to the regression of coronary atherosclerosis over and

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

beyond exercise and other programs in the intervention. Indeed,
in an angiographic trial conducted in Germany, increased ex-
ercise was the most important variable that predicted the re-
duction in coronary stenosis [80]. The low-fat regimen in the
Lifestyle Heart Study has been criticized as being extreme and
unnecessarily rigid. Even fatty fish and nuts, which have been
documented to protect against CHD, are excluded. Poor adher-
ence to such diet is another major concern in the application of
such diet to the public.

Two other multifactorial intervention trials have yielded
favorable results on progression of atherosclerosis among pa-
tients with existing coronary disease [80,81]. Both trials in-
volved a low saturated fat and relatively high polyunsaturated
diet (P:S ratio .1) and intensive physical exercise. In the trial
conducted in Germany [80], the treatment also comprised in-
tensive physical exercise in group training sessions (minimum,
2 hr/wk) and daily home exercise periods (20 min/day). After
12 months, 32% patients in the intervention group experienced
regression of coronary lesions as compared with 17% in the
control group. In contrast, 48% patients in the control group
experienced progression of coronary lesions as compared with
23% in the treatment group. Besides dietary intervention, the
Stanford Coronary Risk Intervention Project (SCRIP) [81] in-
volved exercise, smoking cessation, weight loss and cholester-
ol-lowering medications. After four years, the rate of narrowing
of diseased coronary artery segments in the intervention group
was 47% less than that for subjects in the control group. The
success of these secondary prevention trials using angiographic
endpoints is in direct contrast to the disappointing results from
several primary prevention trials of multifactorial approach
[82,83]. However, because multiple dietary, lifestyle and even
medication changes were made simultaneously in these trials,
the interpretation of any observed difference in outcome is
complicated. In addition, whether coronary stenosis detected by
angiography is a valuable endpoint is not yet settled [84].

In summary, dietary intervention trials in general support the
benefit of replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat. Evi-
dence regarding the replacement of total or saturated fat by car-
bohydrate is more limited, but is generally unsupportive of benefit.
These results are consistent with prospective cohort studies and
metabolic studies indicating the importance of types of fat. Al-
though the ideal randomized trial of dietary fat and primary
prevention of CHD in free-living populations has not been and
may never be conducted due to feasibility concerns, the existing
evidence powerfully supports the strategy of replacing saturated
and trans fats with unhydrogenated unsaturated fats.

FISH AND MARINE N-3 FATTY
ACIDS

A low rate of cardiovascular disease in populations with
very high intake of fish, such as Alaskan Native Americans
[85,86], Greenland Eskimos [87,88] and Japanese living fishing

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF NUTRITION

11

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

villages [89,90], suggests that fish oil may be protective against
atherosclerosis. Subsequent prospective cohort studies have
found an inverse association between fish consumption and risk
of cardiovascular mortality in diverse populations. Krombout et
al. [91] demonstrated in the Dutch component of the Seven
Countries Study, with 20 years of follow-up, that men who
consumed 30g of fish per day had a 50% lower CHD mortality
than men who rarely ate fish. In the Western Electric Study,
Daviglus et al. [92] have found that men who consumed 35g or
more of fish per day had a 40% lower risk of fatal CHD. In the
US Physicians’ Health Study, Albert et al. [93] found that
weekly fish consumption led to a RR of 0.48 (95% CI 0.24 –
0.96) for sudden cardiac death, although in the same cohort, no
significant association was observed between fish consumption
and overall cardiovascular endpoints [94]. In the Health Pro-
fessionals’ Follow-up Study, Ascherio et al. [95] found no
overall association between dietary intake of n-3 fatty acids or
fish intake and the risk of coronary disease, but there was a
non-significant trend for a reduction in risk for fatal CHD with
increasing fish consumption. These studies suggest that fish is
probably more protective against fatal CHD than nonfatal myo-
cardial infarction.

Two interventional studies, the Diet and Reinfarction Trial
(DART) [96] and the GISSI-Prevenzione trial [97], have eval-
uated whether fish consumption or fish oil supplementation
reduces coronary mortality among MI patients. The diet and
reinfarction trial (DART), which included 2033 men allocated
to three dietary interventions, showed that subjects who re-
ceived fish advice had a significant reduction in total mortality
of 29% after two years. While not statistically significant, there
was also a trend toward a reduction in recurrent ischemic heart
disease events with increased fatty fish consumption. The more
recent GISSI-Prevenzione trial randomly assigned 11,324 myo-
cardial infarction patients to four different groups: n-3 fatty
acids (850 – 882 mg EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA
(docosahexaenoic acid) (1:2)), vitamin E (330 mg alpha-toco-
pherol), a combination of n-3 and vitamin E and control. Daily
supplementation with n-3 fatty acids resulted in a 10% to 15%
reduction in the main endpoints (death, non-fatal MI and
stroke). Most of the reduction was attributable to the decrease
in cardiovascular death, especially sudden cardiac death. These
two trials provide support for a therapeutic role of fish oil in the
treatment of MI patients.

The protective effects of marine n-3 fatty acids are probably
due to multiple mechanisms, including reducing triglyceride
levels [98], reducing platelet aggregation [99] and anti-arrhyth-
mic effects [100]. There is growing evidence to suggest that
fish oil may improve endothelial dysfunction, an early marker
of atherosclerosis [101,102]. In vitro studies have consistently
shown that n-3 fatty acids decrease expression of adhesion
molecules on the endothelium and also decrease leukocyte/
endothelium interactions [101]. Additionally, clinical experi-
mental studies have shown that n-3 fatty acid supplementation
improves endothelial-dependent vasomotor function [102,103].

ALPHA-LINOLENIC ACID (ALA)

ALA is an essential n-3 fatty acid for humans [104,105];
adequate intake of ALA and long-chain n-3 fatty acids is
especially important for infants, young children [106] and
patients requiring parenteral and enteral nutrition [106 –108]. In
animals and humans, ALA can be metabolized to long-chain
polyunsaturated n-3 fatty acids,
including eicosapentaenoic
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) acids through the desatu-
ration-chain elongation pathway [109]. Increased dietary con-
sumption of ALA may decrease platelet aggregation and reduce
formation of pro-aggregatory thromboxane A2 by inhibiting the
conversion of linoleic acid (18:2, n-6) to arachidonic acid
(20:4, n-6) [110]. In a dietary intervention study of French
farmers, Renaud and colleagues [111] changed the type of fats
by replacing butter by oil and margarine rich in ALA (rapeseed
oil). After two years, the EPA content of plasma lipids and
platelet phospolipids increased significantly and platelet aggre-
gation was significantly diminished.

Experimental studies have suggested an antiarrhythmic ef-
fect of ALA. In cell culture studies, the addition of ALA slows
the beating rate of isolated neonatal rat cardiac myocytes [112].
In animal experiments in which arrhythmias were induced by
coronary occlusion and reperfusion, significant reductions in
the incidence of ventricular fibrillation and cardiac mortality
were observed in rats fed with ALA-rich diets. In one of the
experiments [113], similar significant reductions in cardiac
arrhythmia were observed in animals fed red meat supple-
mented with fish oil and in those fed red meat supplemented
with canola oil (8% ALA), when compared to the control group
(fed only red meat). Interestingly, mortality was even lower in
the canola oil group than in fish oil group (7% vs. 10%). In
another experiment [114], mortality due to ventricular fibrilla-
tion was significantly lower in rats fed a diet containing canola
oil, compared to those fed olive oil. The antiarrhythmic effect
of ALA may be attributable to an increased electrical threshold
for induction of ventricular fibrillation [114]. In a secondary
prevention trial conducted among patients with existing myo-
cardial infarction (Lyon Diet Heart Trial) [73], no sudden death
occurred in patients randomized to a Mediterranean diet en-
riched with ALA, compared with eight deaths in the control
group. This study supports an antiarrhythmic effect of ALA in
humans although other dietary changes were made simulta-
neously in this trial.

Several epidemiologic studies have examined the associa-
tion between ALA intake and risk of CHD. In the usual care
group of the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial [24], men
in the highest quintile of ALA intake (expressed as percent of
energy) had a 40% lower CHD mortality compared to men in
the lowest quintile. In the Health Professionals Follow-up
Study [13], a 1% increase in linolenic intake (expressed as
percent of energy) was associated with a 40% lower risk of
fatal CHD. In the Finnish Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene
Cancer Prevention Study [12], men in the highest quintile of

12

VOL. 20, NO. 1

energy-adjusted ALA intake had 25% lower CHD mortality. In
these three studies, however, the association between ALA
intake and CHD was not the main focus, and none were
adequately adjusted for other dietary factors, including intakes
of other fats, dietary vitamins, folate and vegetables.

Recently, Hu and colleagues examined the relation of ALA
intake to incidence of fatal CHD during 10 years of follow-up
in the Nurses’ Health Study [115]. After adjusting for coronary
risk factors, the RRs of fatal CHD from the lowest to highest
quintiles of ALA intake were 1.0, 0.89, 0.90, 0.66, and 0.52
[95% CI 0.30 – 0.90], p for trend 5 0.01. The major contribu-
tors of ALA in the Nurses’ Health Study were oil and vinegar
(e.g., Italian salad dressing) and mayonnaise salad dressings;
these products are typically made with soybean oil, which
contains approximately 7% ALA if it is not hydrogenated. Hu
et al. [115] found an approximately 50% lower risk of fatal
CHD among women who consumed oil and vinegar salad
dressing frequently (five to six times or more a week) com-
pared to those who consumed this salad dressing less than once
a month, after adjusting for vegetable consumption.

Given the strong evidence to support beneficial effects of
ALA on cardiovascular disease, flaxseed as well as other im-
portant dietary sources of ALA (e.g., unhydrogenated canola
and soybean oils and walnuts) (Table 3) can be incorporated
into a healthy and balanced diet for the prevention of cardio-
vascular disease [116]. This is especially important for those
choosing not to consume fish. The above findings also raise
concern that the widespread promotion of fat-free salad dress-
ings and mayonnaise, a primary source of ALA in the U.S. diet,
may have an adverse effect on CHD rates.

Table 3. a-Linolenic Acid Content of Various Oils and
Foods

Product

a-Linolenic acid

% by wt

Flaxseed oil
Soy oil
Canola oil
Olive oil
Chocolate
Corn oil
Coconut oil
Safflower oil
English walnuts, dry roasted
Hazelnuts, dry roasted
Almonds, dry roasted
Peanuts, dry roasted
Cashews, dry roasted
Green leafy vegetables, raw edible portion

Spinach
Brussels sprouts
Kale

50.8
7.0
9.3
0.6
0.1
1.0
Trace
0.4
6.8
0.2
0.4
Trace
0.2

0.12
0.20
0.13

Reproduced from [116] with permission of the American Society for Clinical
Nutrition.

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

THE BALANCE BETWEEN N-3 AND
N-6 POLYUNSATURATED FATTY
ACIDS

Due to the competition between ALA and linoleic acid for
the desaturation and chain elongation pathway [117], ALA’s
incorporation into plasma and tissue lipids and its conversion to
long-chain n-3 fatty acids are influenced by linoleic acid levels.
Thus, the optimal balance between dietary ALA and linoleic
acid may be important to prevent thrombosis and atheroscle-
rosis [114,118]. In the Nurses’ Health Study [115], the ratio of
ALA to linoleic acid was less strongly related to risk of fatal CHD
than was ALA alone. The multivariate RRs of fatal CHD across
quintiles of the ratio (median values 0.07, 0.09, 0.10, 0.11, and
0.14) were 1.0, 1.02, 0.84, 0.87, and 0.84 (0.53–1.33) [p for
trend 5 0.40]. These results suggest a modest reduction in CHD
risk with a ratio of ALA to linoleic acid greater than 0.10.

Because ALA and its metabolite, EPA, can decrease gen-
eration of thromboxane A2, a pro-aggregatory vasoconstrictor,
through their inhibitory action on the conversion from linoleic
acid to arachidonic acid and the activity of enzyme cyclooxy-
genase [112,119 –121], it is expected that a greater ratio of
ALA to linoleic acid will lower risk of CHD, through decreas-
ing thrombotic tendency. However, the prostanoid pathway is
only one mechanism through which dietary fatty acids influ-
ence the development of CHD. The primary mechanism by
which n-6 polyunsaturated fat lowers risk of CHD is through
lowering LDL cholesterol, although n-6 fatty acids may also
have other beneficial effects, such as improving insulin sensi-
tivity [28] and lowering the threshold for ventricular fibrillation
[121]. Because both n-6 and n-3 fatty acids are associated with
a lower risk of CHD, although through different biological
pathways, the ratio is only weakly related to CHD risk. Nev-
ertheless, it is generally agreed that the ratio of n-3 to n-6 fatty
acids in the U.S. diet is less than optimal and should be
improved. The point of controversy lies in how to improve the
ratio. Although most researchers have proposed to increase the
consumption of n-3 fatty acids from both fish and plant sources,
others have suggested a reduction in consumption of n-6 fatty
acids [122]. Considering the strong protective effect of n-6
polyunsaturated fat against CHD observed in epidemiologic
studies and clinical trials, the latter strategy does not seem
justifiable. On the contrary, available data strongly support the
strategy of replacing animal and hydrogenated fats with natural
liquid vegetables oils, which contain both monounsaturated and
polyunsaturated fats, in reducing risk of CHD. Such replace-
ment can also increase the intake of n-3 fatty acids because
several vegetable oils including canola and soybean oils con-
tain a substantial amount of ALA. Meanwhile, an increase in
fish consumption to at least two servings per week has been
recommended for the prevention of CHD [123]. These strate-
gies will substantially increase the absolute amount of n-3 fatty
acids in the diet and help to achieve a more desirable ratio of

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF NUTRITION

13

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

n-3 to n-6 fatty acids, without sacrificing the benefit of n-6
polyunsaturated fat.

DIETARY CHOLESTERAL AND EGGS

Dietary cholesterol raises LDL cholesterol levels and very
high intakes cause atherosclerosis in numerous animal models
[124]. In controlled metabolic studies conducted in humans,
dietary cholesterol raises levels of total and LDL cholesterol in
blood [25,125], but the effects are relatively small compared
with saturated and trans fatty acids [126,127], and individuals
vary widely in their responses [128,129]. A significant positive
association between dietary cholesterol and CHD was found in
some
in others
[12,13,32,33]. In a pooled analysis of four studies [5–7,11], the
relative risk of CHD was 1.30 (1.10 –1.50) for a difference of
200 mg/1000 kcal in dietary cholesterol [124]. But this analysis
included only those studies with positive findings. The Nurses’
Health Study found a weak and nonsignificant positive associ-
ation between dietary cholesterol and risk of CHD (relative risk
for each increase of 200 mg/1000 kcal 5 1.12, 95% confidence
interval 0.91–1.40) [130].

[5,11], but not

epidemiologic

studies

To avoid elevations in blood cholesterol and reduce CHD
risk, the public has been advised to consume no more than 300
mg cholesterol daily and limit consumption of eggs, which
contain about 213 mg cholesterol per egg [131,132]. In con-
trolled metabolic studies, ingestion of cholesterol by feeding
egg yolks or whole eggs raises blood total and LDL cholesterol
levels [126 –128,133]. In most egg feeding studies, intakes of
other nutrients such as fatty acids, carbohydrates and protein
were balanced between egg and no-egg groups so that only
dietary cholesterol varied. Therefore, these studies did not
really examine the impact of ingestion of eggs per se on blood
lipids.

Surprisingly, there is little direct evidence linking higher
egg consumption and increased risk of CHD. In the Framing-
ham study, Dawber and colleagues [134] found no significant
association between egg consumption and incidence of CHD
despite a wide range of egg intake. In an earlier analysis of the
Seventh-Day Adventists study [135], higher egg consumption
appeared to be associated with increased risk of fatal CHD, but
this association was not present in a more recent analysis with
a longer follow-up [136]. In a case-control study conducted in
Italy [137], the frequency of egg consumption was not signif-
icantly associated with risk of CHD in women. In a detailed
analysis of egg consumption and incidence of CHD among
117,933 apparently healthy subjects in the Nurses’ Health
Study and Health Professionals’ Follow-up Study, Hu and
colleagues [138] found no evidence of an overall positive
association between egg consumption and risk of CHD in either
men or women. The relative risks (RRs) of CHD across cate-
gories of intake (,1/week, 1/wk, 2– 4/week, 5– 6/week, .51/
day) were 1.0, 1.06, 1.12, 0.90, and 1.08 (p for trend 5 0.75)

in men and 1.0, 0.82, 0.99, 0.95, and 0.82 (p for trend 5 0.95)
in women.

The null association between egg consumption and risk of
CHD observed in these studies may be somewhat surprising,
considering the widespread belief that eggs are a major cause of
heart disease. One egg contains about 200 mg cholesterol, but
also appreciable amounts of protein, unsaturated fats, folate, B
vitamins and minerals. It is conceivable that the small adverse
effect caused by cholesterol is counterbalanced by potential
beneficial effects of other nutrients.

One potential alternative explanation for the null finding is
that background dietary cholesterol may be so high in the usual
Western diet that adding somewhat more has little further effect
on blood cholesterol. In a randomized trial, Sacks et al. [139]
found that adding one egg per day to the usual diet of 17
lactovegetarians whose habitual cholesterol intake was very
low (97 mg/day) significantly increased LDL cholesterol level
by 12%. In a meta-analysis of controlled metabolic studies,
Hopkins [140] found that serum cholesterol’s response to
added dietary cholesterol is modulated by baseline cholesterol
intake. The higher the baseline cholesterol intake, the less the
response induced by adding cholesterol to the diet. In the
analyses conducted by Hu et al. [138], differences in non-egg
cholesterol intake did not appear to be an explanation for the
null association between egg consumption and risk of CHD.
However, the possibility that egg consumption may modestly
increase the risk among participants with very low background
cholesterol intake cannot be excluded.

These findings do not suggest that one should go back to the
traditional high cholesterol Western diet. Instead, they suggest
that among healthy men and women, moderate egg consump-
tion can be part of a nutritious and balanced diet. Because eggs
are excellent and relatively inexpensive sources of essential
amino acids and certain vitamins, they can substitute for other
animal products such as red meat. These results also illustrate
the danger of judging health effects of a food by single nutri-
ents or components contained in the food.

CONCLUSIONS

Compelling evidence indicates the greater importance of
types of fat than total amount of fat with respect to risk of CHD,
although the optimal mixture of different fatty acids remains
unsettled. The seminal metabolic studies conducted by Keys
[25] and Hegested [26] have long established that the type of
fat but not total amount of fat predicts serum cholesterol levels.
Consistent with the metabolic studies, epidemiologic studies
strongly support the idea that types of fat are more important
than total amount of fat in determining the risk of CHD.
Controlled clinical trials have also shown that replacing satu-
rated fat with polyunsaturated fat is more effective in lowering
serum cholesterol and reducing risk of CHD than simply re-
ducing total fat consumption. Moreover, secondary prevention

14

VOL. 20, NO. 1

trials have demonstrated that adding n-3 fatty acids from fish or
plant sources to the diet without altering total amount of fat
substantially reduces coronary and total mortality among
post-MI patients.

A major purported benefit of a low-fat diet is weight loss.
But long-term clinical trials have not provided convincing
evidence that reducing dietary fat can lead to substantial weight
loss [141]. On the contrary, there is some evidence that a diet
containing a high amount of refined carbohydrates may in-
crease hunger and promote overeating, which can lead to
weight gain and obesity [142]. It is now generally agreed that
total energy intake, whether from fat or carbohydrate, relative
to energy expenditure, is a more important determinant of body
weight than dietary fat per se.

It has been increasingly recognized that the widely pro-
moted low-fat concept is too simplistic and not compatible with
available scientific data. In this context, the recently revised
national dietary guidelines [123,143] have de-emphasized the
role of total fat in the prevention of CHD and other chronic
diseases. In particular, the 2000 Dietary Guidelines for Amer-
icans recommend the public to “choose a diet that is low in
saturated fat and cholesterol and moderate in total fat”, which
is modified from the recommendation to “choose a diet low in
fat, saturated fat and cholesterol” stated in the 1995 edition of
the guidelines. But the revised guidelines have inherited the
recommendation of no more than 30% of calories from fat from
previous editions of the guidelines. Also, in the food guide
pyramid, all fats and oils are still lumped together on the top
with no distinguishing of different types of fat. The revised
2000 American Heart Association (AHA) dietary guidelines
have gone a step further to eliminate the upper limit of 30% of
calories from fat as a major dietary recommendation to prevent
cardiovascular disease. Moreover, the AHA major guidelines
recommend the public to substitute unsaturated fatty acids from
vegetable oils, fish, nuts and legumes for saturated and trans
fatty acids. These guidelines, if followed, can have substantial
potential in further reducing rates of CHD in the U.S. However,
due to the campaign against total fat over the years, the belief
that “fat is bad” has been strong and widespread. Thus, great
educational efforts are needed to communicate nutritional mes-
sages about the health effects of different types of fat to the
public and to translate current dietary recommendations into
dietary practice as well.

REFERENCES

1. Mokdad AH, Serdula MK, Dietz WH, Bowman BA, Marks JS,
Koplan JP: The spread of the obesity epidemic in the United
States, 1991–1998. JAMA 282:1519–1522, 1999.

2. Mokdad AH, Ford ES, Bowman BA, Nelson DE, Engelgau MM,
Vinicor F, Marks JS: Diabetes trends in the U.S.: 1990–1998.
Diabetes Care 23:1278–1283, 2000.

3. Keys A: “Seven Countries: A Multivariate Analysis of Death and

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

Coronary Heart Disease.” Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1980.

4. Kromhout D, Menotti A, Bloemberg B, Aravanis C, Blackburn H,
Buzina R, Dontas AS, Fidanza F, Giampaoli S, Jansen A, et al.:
Dietary saturated and trans fatty acids and cholesterol and 25-year
mortality from coronary heart disease: the Seven Countries Study.
Prev Med 24:308–315, 1995.

5. McGee DL, Reed DM, Yano K, Kagan A, Tillotson J: Ten-year
incidence of coronary heart disease in the Honolulu Heart Pro-
gram: Relationship to nutrient intake. Am J Epidemiol 119:667–
676, 1984.

6. Kushi LH, Lew RA, Stare FJ, Ellison CR, el Lozy M, Bourke G,
Daly L, Graham I, Hickey N, Mulcahy R, J K: Diet and 20-year
mortality from coronary heart disease: The Ireland-Boston Diet-
Heart study. N Engl J Med 312:811–818, 1985.

7. Kromhout D, De Lezenne Coulander C: Diet, prevalence and
10-year mortality from coronary heart disease in 871 middle-aged
men: the Zutphen Study. Am J Epidemiol 119:733–741, 1984.

8. Garcia-Palmieri MR, Sorlie P, Tillotson J, Costas Jr R, Cordero
E, Rodriguez M: Relationship of dietary intake to subsequent
coronary heart disease incidence: The Puerto Rico Heart Health
Program. Am J Clin Nutr 33:1818–1827, 1980.

9. Gordon T, Kagan A, Garcia-Palmieri M, Kannel WB, Zukel WJ,
Tillotson J, Sorlie P, Hjortland M: Diet and its relation to coro-
nary heart disease and death in three populations. Circulation
63:500–515, 1981.

10. Morris JN, Marr JW, Clayton DG: Diet and Heart: a postscript.

BMJ 2:1307–1314, 1977.

11. Shekelle RB, Shryock AM, Paul O, Lepper M, Stamler J, Liu S,
Raynor Jr WJ: Diet, serum cholesterol, and death from coronary
heart disease: The Western Electric Study. N Engl J Med 304:
65–70, 1981.

12. Pietinen P, Ascherio A, Korhonen P, Hartman AM, Willett WC,
Albanes D, Virtamo J: Intake of fatty acids and risk of coronary
heart disease in a cohort of Finnish men: The Alpha-Tocopherol,
Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study. Am J Epidemiol 145:
876–887, 1997.

13. Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Giovannucci EL, Spiegelman D,
Stampfer MJ, Willett WC: Dietary fat and risk of coronary heart
disease in men: cohort follow up study in the United States. BMJ
313:84–90, 1996.

14. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Rimm E, Colditz GA, Rosner
BA, Hennekens CH, Willett WC: Dietary fat intake and risk of
coronary heart disease in women. N Engl J Med 337:1491–1499,
1997.

15. Kris-Etherton P, Yu S: Individual fatty acids on plasma lipids and
lipoproteins: human studies. Am J Clin Nutr 65(Suppl):1628S–
1644S, 1997.

16. Temme E, Mensink RP, Hornstra G: Comparison of the effects of
diets enriched in lauric, palmitic, or oleic acids on serum lipids
and lipoproteins in healthy women and men. Am J Clin Nutr
63:897–903, 1996.

17. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Ascherio A, Colditz GA,
Speizer FE, Hennekens CH, Willett WC: Dietary saturated fat and
their food sources in relation to the risk of coronary heart disease
in women. Am J Clin Nutr 70:1001–1008, 1999.

18. Yu S, Derr J, Etherton TD, Kris-Etherton P: Plasma cholesterol-
predictive equations demonstrate that stearic acid is neutral and

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF NUTRITION

15

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

monounsaturated fatty acids are hypocholesterolemic. Am J Clin
Nutr 61:1129–1139, 1995.

19. Aro A, Jauhiainen M, Partanen R, Salminen I, Mutanen M:
Stearic acid, trans fatty acids, and dairy fat: effects on serum and
lipoprotein lipids, apolipoproteins, lipoprotein(a), and lipid trans-
fer proteins in healthy subjects. Am J Clin Nutr 65:1491–1426,
1997.

20. Mitropoulos KA, Miller GJ, Martin JC, Reeves BEA, Cooper J:
Dietary fat
induces changes in factor VII coagulant activity
through effects on plasma free stearic acid concentration. Arte-
rioscler Thromb 14:214–222, 1994.

21. Furguson J, Mackay N, McNicol G: Effect of feeding fat on
fibrinolysis, Stypven time, and platelet aggregation in Africans,
Asians, and Europeans. J Clin Pathol 23:580–585, 1970.

22. Grundy SM, Bilheimer D, Blackburn H, Brown WV, Kwiterovich
POJ, Mattson F, Schonfeld G, Weidman WH: Rationale of the
diet-heart statement of the American Heart Association. Report of
Nutrition Committee. Circulation 65:839A–854A, 1982.

23. Sacks F: Dietary fats and coronary heart disease. Overview.

J Cardiovasc Risk 1:3–8, 1994.

24. Dolecek TA: Epidemiological evidence of relationships between
dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids and mortality in the multiple
risk factor intervention trial. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 200:177–
182, 1992.

25. Keys A, Parlin RW: Serum-cholesterol response to changes in

dietary lipids. Am J Clin Nutr 19:175–181, 1966.

26. Hegsted DM, McGandy RB, Myers ML, Stare FJ: Quantitative
effects of dietary fat on serum cholesterol in man. Am J Clin Nutr
17:281–295, 1965.

27. Lovejoy J, DiGirolamo M: Habitual dietary intake and insulin
sensitivity in lean and obese adults. Am J Clin Nutr 55:1174–
1179, 1992.

28. Lovejoy JC: Dietary fatty acids and insulin resistance. Curr

Atheroscler Rep 1:215–220, 1999.

29. Hu F, Salmeron J, Manson J, Stampfer M, Colditz G, Rimm E,
Willett W: Dietary fat and risk of type 2 diabetes in women
[Abstract]. Am J Epidemiol 149:S1, 1999.

30. Abeywardena MY, McLennan PL, Charnock JS: Differential
effects of dietary fish oil on myocardial prostaglandin I2 and
thromboxane A2 production. Am J Physiol 260:H379–385, 1991.
31. Jacobs D, Blackburn G, Higgins M, Reed D, Iso H, McMillan G,
Neaton J, Nelson J, Potter J, Rifkind B, Rossouw J, Shekeller R,
Usuf S: Report of the Conference on Low Blood Cholesterol:
Mortality Associations. Circulation 86:1046–1060, 1992.

32. Posner BM, Cobb JL, Belanger AJ, Cupples A, D’Agostino RB,
Stokes III J: Dietary lipid predictors of coronary heart disease in
men. Arch Intern Med 151:1181–1187, 1991.

33. Esrey KL, Joseph L, Grover SA: Relationship between dietary
intake and coronary heart disease mortality: Lipid research clinics
prevalence follow-up study. J Clin Epidemiol 49:211–216, 1996.
34. Mensink RP, Katan MB: Effect of dietary fatty acids on serum
lipids and lipoproteins: a meta-analysis of 27 trials. Arterioscler
and Thromb 12:911–919, 1992.

35. Garg A, Grundy SM, Koffler M: Effect of high carbohydrate
intake on hyperglycemia, islet cell function, and plasma lipopro-
teins in NIDDM. Diabetes Care 15:1572–1580, 1992.

Steinberg D: Low density lipoprotein rich in oleic acid is pro-
tected against oxidative modification: Implications for dietary
prevention of atherosclerosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:3894–
3898, 1990.

37. Aro A, Kardinaal AFM, Salminen I, Kark JD, Riemersma RA,
Delgado-Rodriguez M, Gomez-Aracena J, Huttunen JK,
Kohlmeier L, Martin BC, Martin-Moreno JM, Mazaev VP, Ring-
stad J, Thamm M, van’t Veer P, Kok FJ: Adipose tissue isomeric
trans fatty acids and risk of myocardial infarction in nine coun-
tries: the EURAMIC study. Lancet 345:273–278, 1995.

38. Roberts TL, Wood DA, Riemersma RA, Gallagher PJ, Lampe
FC: Trans isomers of oleic and linoleic acids in adipose tissue and
sudden cardiac death. Lancet 345:278–282, 1995.

39. Judd JT, Clevidence BA, Muesing RA, Wittes J, Sunkin ME,
Podczasy JJ: Dietary trans fatty acids: effects of plasma lipids and
lipoproteins of healthy men and women. Am J Clin Nutr 59:861–
868, 1994.

40. Lichtenstein AH, Ausman LM, Carrasco W, Jenner JL, Ordovas
JM, Schaefer EJ: Hydrogenation impairs the hypolipidemic effect
of corn oil in humans. Aterioscler Thromb 13:154–161, 1993.

41. Mensink RPM, Katan MB: Effect of dietary trans fatty acids on
high-density and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels in
healthy subjects. N Engl J Med 323:439–45, 1990.

42. Zock PL, Katan MB: Hydrogenation alternatives: effects of trans
fatty acids and stearic acid versus linoleic acid on serum lipids
and lipoproteins in humans. J Lipid Res 33:399–410, 1992.

43. Willett WC, Ascherio A: Trans fatty acids: Are the effects only

marginal? Am J Public Health 84:722–724, 1994.

44. Nestel P, Noakes M, Belling Bea: Plasma lipoprotein and Lp[a]
changes with substitution of elaidic acid for oleic acid in the diet.
J Lipid Res 33:1029–1036, 1992.

45. Sundram K, Ismail A, Hays KC, Jeyamalar R, Pathmanathan R:
Trans (Elaidic) fatty acids adversely affect the lipoprotein profile
relative to specific saturated fatty acids in humans. J Nutr 127:
514S–520S, 1997.

46. Utermann G: The mysteries of lipoprotein (a). Science 246:904–

910, 1989.

47. Katan MB, Zock PL: Trans fatty acids and their effects on

lipoproteins in humans. Annu Rev Nutr 15:473–493, 1995.

48. Hokanson JE, Austin MA: Plasma triglyceride level is a risk
factor for cardiovascular disease independent of high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol level: a meta-analysis of population-based
prospective studies. J Cardiovasc Risk 3:213–219, 1996.

49. Stampfer MJ, Krauss RM, Ma J, Blance PJ, Holl LG, Sacks FM,
Hennekens CH: A prospective study of triglyceride level, low-
density lipoprotein particle diameter, and risk of myocardial
infarction. JAMA 276:882–888, 1996.

50. Hill EG, Johnson SB, Lawson LD, Mahfouz MM, Holman RT:
Perturbation of the metabolism of essential fatty acids by dietary
partially hydrogenated vegetable oil. Proc Natl Acad Sci 79:953–
957, 1982.

51. Kinsella JE, Bruckner G, Mai J, Shimp J: Metabolism of trans
fatty acids with emphasis on the effects of trans,
trans-
octadecadienoate on lipid composition, essential fatty acid, and
prostaglandins: an overview. Am J Clin Nutr 34:2307–2318,
1981.

52. Jones D: Trans fatty acids and dieting [Letter]. Lancet 341:1093,

36. Parthasarathy S, Khoo JC, Miller E, Barnett J, Witztum JL,

1993.

16

VOL. 20, NO. 1

53. Ascherio A, Katan MB, Zock PL, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC:
Trans fatty acids and coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med
340:1994–1998, 1999.

54. Katan MB: Trans fatty acids and plasma lipoproteins. Nutr Rev

58:188–191, 2000.

55. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ: Nut consumption and risk of coronary heart
disease: A review of epidemiologic evidence. Curr Atheroscl Rep
1:204–209, 1999.

56. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Rimm GA, Colditz GA, Rosner
B, Speizer FE, Hennekens CH, Willett WC: Frequent nut con-
sumption and risk of coronary heart disease: prospective cohort
study. BMJ 317:1341–1345, 1998.

57. Fraser GE, Sabate J, Beeson WL, Strahan TM: A possible pro-
tective effect of nut consumption on risk of coronary heart dis-
ease. The Adventist Health Study. Arch Intern Med 152:1416–
1424, 1992.

58. Sabate J: Does nut consumption protest against ischemic heart

disease. Eur J Clin Nutr 47:S71–S75, 1993.

59. Abbey M, Noakes M, Belling GB, Nestel P: Partial replacement
of saturated fatty acids with almonds or walnuts lowers total
plasma cholesterol and low-density-lipoprotein cholesterol. Am J
Clin Nutr 59:995–999, 1994.

60. Spiller GA, Jenkins D, Gragen LN, Gates JE, Bosello O, Berra K,
Rudd C, Stevenson M, Superko R: Effect of a diet high in
monounsaturated fat from almonds on plasma cholesterol and
lipoproteins. J Am Coll Nutr 11:126–130, 1992.

61. O’byrne DJ, Knauft DA, Shireman RB: Low fat-monounsaturated
rich diets containing high-oleic peanuts improve serum lipopro-
tein profiles. Lipids 32:687–695, 1997.

62. Willett WC: “Nutritional Epidemiology,” 2nd ed. New York, NY:

Oxford University Press, 1998.

63. Oliver MF: It is more important to increase the intake of unsat-
urated fats than to decrease the intake of saturated fats: evidence
from clinical trials relating to ischemic heart disease. Am J Clin
Nutr 66:980S–986S, 1997.

64. Sacks FM: Dietary factors. In Hennekens CH (ed): “Clinical
Trials in Cardiovascular Disease: A Companion to Braunwald’s
Heart Disease.” Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, pp 423–431, 1999.
65. Dayton S, Pearce ML, Hashimoto S, Dixon WJ, Tomiyasu U: A
controlled clinical trial of a diet high in unsaturated fat in pre-
venting complications of atherosclerosis. Circulation 40:(Suppl
II):1–63, 1969.

66. Turpeinen O, Karvonen MJ, Pekkarinen M, Miettinen M, Elosuo
R, Paavilainen E: Dietary prevention of coronary heart disease:
The Finnish Mental Hospital Study. Int J Epidemiol 8:99–118,
1979.

67. Frantz Jr ID, Dawson EA, Ashman PL, Gatewood LC, Bartsch
GE, Kuba K, Brewer ER: Test of effect of lipid lowering by diet
on cardiovascular risk. The Minnesota Coronary Survey. Arterio-
sclerosis 9:129–135, 1989.

68. Leren P: The Oslo Diet-Heart Study. Acta Med Scand

466(Suppl):5–92, 1966.

69. Leren P: The Oslo Diet-Heart Study. Eleven-year report. Circu-

lation 42:935–942, 1970.

70. Morris JN, Ball KP, Antonis A, et al: Controlled trial of soya-

bean oil in myocardial infarction. Lancet 2:693–699, 1968.

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

JM, Sharland DE, Sowry GSC, Wilkinson P, Clarke JAC, Mur-
land C, Wood J, Medical Research Council Committee: Low-fat
diet in myocardial infarction—A controlled trial. Lancet 2:501–
504, 1965.

72. Burr ML, Fehily AM, Gilbert JF, Rogers S, Holliday RM, Sweet-
nam PM, Elwood PC, Deadman NM: Effects of changes in fat,
fish, and fibre intakes on death and myocardial reinfarction: diet
and reinfarction trial (DART): Lancet 2:757–761, 1989.

73. deLorgeril M, Renaud S, Mamelle N, Salen P, Martin J-L, Mon-
jaud I, Guidollet J, Touboul P, Delaye J: Mediterranean alpha-
linolenic acid-rich diet in secondary prevention of coronary heart
disease. Lancet 343:1454–1459, 1994.

74. de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL, Monjaud I, Delaye J, Mamelle
N: Mediterranean diet, traditional risk factors, and the rate of
cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarction: final
report of the Lyon Diet Heart Study. Circulation 99:779–785,
1999.

75. Singh RB, Rastogi SS, Verman R, Laxmi B, Singh R, Ghosh S,
Niaz MA: Randomised controlled trial of cardioprotective diet in
patients with recent acute myocardial infarction: results of one
year follow up. BMJ 304:1015–1019, 1992.

76. Arntzenius AC, Kromhout D, Barth JD, Reiber JH, Bruschke AV,
Buis B, van Gent CM, Kempen-Voogd N, Strikwerda S, van der
Velde EA: Diet, lipoproteins, and the progression of coronary
atherosclerosis. The Leiden Intervention Trial. N Engl J Med
312:805–811, 1985.

77. Watts GF, Lewis B, Brunt JNH, Lewis ES, Coltart DJ, Smith LD,
Mann JI, Swan AV: Effects of coronary artery disease of lipid-
lowering diet, or diet plus cholestyramine, in the St. Thomas’
Atherosclerosis Regression Study (STARS). Lancet 339:563–
569, 1992.

78. Ornish D, Brown SE, Scherwitz LW, Billings JH, Armstrong
WT, Ports TA, McLanahan SM, Kirkeeide RL, Brand RJ, Gould
KL: Can lifestyle changes reverse coronary heart disease? The
Lifestyle Heart Trial. Lancet 336:129–133, 1990.

79. Ornish D, Scherwitz LW, Billings JH, Brown SE, Gould KL,
Merritt TA, Sparler S, Armstrong WT, Ports TA, Kirkeeide RL,
Hogeboom C, Brand RJ: Intensive lifestyle changes for reversal
of coronary heart disease. JAMA 280:2001–2007, 1998.

80. Schuler G, Hambrecht R, Schlierf G, Niebauer J, Hauer K,
Neumann J, Hoberg E, Drinkmann A, Bacher F, Grunze M, et al.:
Regular physical exercise and low-fat diet. Effects on progression
of coronary artery disease. Circulation 86:1–11, 1992.

81. Haskell WL, Alderman EL, Fair JM, Maron DJ, Mackey SF,
Superko HR, Williams PT, Johnstone IM, Champagne MA,
Krauss RM, et al.: Effects of intensive multiple risk factor reduc-
tion on coronary atherosclerosis and clinical cardiac events in
men and women with coronary artery disease. The Stanford
Coronary Risk Intervention Project (SCRIP). Circulation 89:975–
990, 1994.

82. Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group: Mortal-
ity after 16 years for participants randomized to the Multiple Risk
Factor Intervention Trial. Circulation 94:946–951, 1996.

83. Strandberg TE, Salomaa VV, Naukkarinen VA, Vanhanen HT,
Sarna SJ, Miettinen TA: Long-term mortality after 5-year multi-
factorial primary prevention of cardiovascular diseases in middle-
aged men. JAMA 266:1225–1229, 1991.

71. Ball KP, Hanington E, McAllen PM, Pilkington TRE, Richards

84. Brown BG, Zhao XQ, Sacco DE, Albers JJ: Lipid lowering and

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF NUTRITION

17

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

plaque regression. New insights into prevention of plaque disrup-
tion and clinical events in coronary disease. Circulation 87:1781–
1791, 1993.

85. Newman WP, Propst MT, Middaugh JP, Rogers DR: Atheroscle-
rosis in Alaska natives and non-natives. Lancet 341:1056–1057,
1993.

86. Middaugh J: Cardiovascular deaths among Alaskan natives,

1980–1986. Am J Public Health 80:282–285, 1990.

87. Kromann N, Green A: Epidemiological studies in Upernavik

District, Greenland. Acta Med Scand 208:401–406, 1980.

88. Bang HO, Dyerberg J, Hjorne N: The composition of food con-
sumed by Greenland Eskimos. Acta Med Scand 200:69–73, 1976.
89. Hirai A, Hamazaki T, Terano T, Nishikawa T, Tamura Y, Kuma-
gai A, Jajiki J: Eicosapentaenoic acid and platelet function in
Japanese. Lancet 2:1132–1133, 1980.

90. Kagawa Y, Nishizawa M, Suzuki M, Miyatake T, Hamamoto T,
Goto K, Motonaga E, Izumikawa H, Hirata H, Ebihara A: Eico-
sapolyenoic acids of serum lipids of Japanese islanders with low
incidence of cardiovascular disease. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol 28:441–
453, 1982.

91. Kromhout D, Bosschieter EB, Coulander C: The inverse relation
between fish consumption and 20-year mortality from coronary
heart disease. N Engl J Med 312:1205–1209, 1985.

92. Daviglus ML, Stamler J, Orencia AJ, Dyer AR, Liu K, Greenland
P, Walsh MK, Morris D, Shekelle RB: Fish consumption and the
30-year risk of fatal myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 336:
1046–1053, 1997.

93. Albert CM, Hennekens CH, O’Donnell CJ, Ajani UA, Carey VJ,
Willett WC, Ruskin JN, Manson JE: Fish consumption and the
risk of sudden cardiac death. JAMA 279:23–28, 1998.

94. Morris MC, Manson JE, Rosner B, Buring JE, Willett WC,
Hennekens CH: Fish consumption and cardiovascular disease in
the Physicians’ Health Study: a prospective study. Am J Epide-
miol 142:166–175, 1995.

95. Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, Giovannucci EL, Willett
WC: Dietary intake of marine n-3 fatty acids, fish intake, and the
risk of coronary heart disease among men. N Engl J Med 332:
977–982, 1995.

96. Burr ML, Fehily AM, Gilbert JF, Rogers S, Holliday RM, Sweet-
nam PM, Elwood PC, Deadman NM: Effects of changes in fat,
fish, and fibre intakes on death and myocardial reinfarction: diet
and reinfarction trial. Lancet 2:757–761, 1989.

97. Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza nell’Infarto
miocardico: Dietary supplementation with n-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids and vitamin E after myocardial infarction: results from
the GISSI-Prevenzione trial. Lancet 354:447–455, 1999.

98. Harris WS: Fish oils and plasma lipid and lipoprotein metabolism

in humans: a critical review. J Lipid Res 30:785–807, 1989.

99. von Shacky C: n-3 fatty acids and the prevention of coronary

atherosclerosis. Am J Clin Nutr 71:224S–227S, 2000.

100. Kang JX, Leaf A: Prevention of fatal cardiac arrhythmias by
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Am J Clin Nutr 71:202S–207S, 2000.
101. DeCaterina R, Liao JK, Libby P: Fatty acid modulation of endo-

thelial activation. Am J Clin Nutr 71:213S–223S, 2000.

102. Goodfellow J, Bellamy MF, Ramsey MW, Jones CJ, Lewis MJ:
Dietary supplementation with marine omega-3 fatty acids im-
prove systemic large artery endothelial function in subjects with
hypercholesterolemia. J Am Coll Cardiol 35:265–270, 2000.

103. Fleischhauer FJ, Yan WD, Fischell TA: Fish oil improves endo-
thelium-dependent coronary vasodilation in heart transplant re-
cipients. J Am Coll Cardiol 21:982–989, 1993.

104. Neuringer M, Connor WE: n-3 Fattay acids in the brain and
retina: evidence for their essentiality. Nutr Rev. 44:285–294,
1986.

105. Neuringer M, Anderson GJ, Connor WE: The essentiality of n-3
fatty acids for the development and function of the retina and
brain. Ann Rev Nutr. 8:517–541, 1988.

106. Nelson GJ, Chamberlain JG: The effect of dietary alpha-linolenic
acid on blood lipids and lipoproteins in humans. In Cunnane SC,
Thompson LU (eds): “Flaxseed in Human Nutrition.” Cham-
paign, IL: AOAC Press, pp 99–127, 1995.

107. Bjerve KS, Mostad IL, Thoresen L: Alpha-linolenic acid defi-
ciency in patients on long-term gastric-tube feeding: estimation of
linolenic acid and long-chain unsaturated n-3 fatty acid require-
ment in man. Am J Clin Nutr 45:66–77, 1987.

108. Holman RT, Johnson SB, Hatch TF: A case of human linolenic
acid deficiency involving neurological abnormalities. Am J Clin
Nutr 35:617–623, 1982.

109. Cunnane SC: Metabolism and function of alpha-linolenic acid in
humans. In Cunnane SC, Thompson LU (eds): “Flaxseed in
Human Nutrition.” Champaign, IL: AOAC Press, pp 99–127,
1995.

110. Adam O, Wolfram G, Zollner N: Effect of alpha-linolenic acid in
the human diet on linoleic acid metabolism and prostaglandin
biosythesis. J Lipid Res 27:421–426, 1986.

111. Renaud S, Nordoy A: “Small is beautiful”: alpha-linolenic acid
and eicosapentaenoic acid in man [Letter]. Lancet 1:1169, 1983.
112. Kang JX, Leaf A: Antiarrhythmic effects of polyunsaturated fatty

acids: Recent studies. Circulation 94:1774–1780, 1996.

113. Siebert BD, McLennan PL, Woodhouse JA, Charnock JS: Car-
diac arrthythmia in rats in response to dietary n-3 fatty acids from
red meat, fish oil and canola oil. Nutr Res 13:1407–1418, 1993.
114. McLennan PL, Dallimore JA: Dietary canola oil modifies myo-
cardial fatty acids and inhibits cardiac arrthythmias in rats. J Nutr
125:1003–1009, 1995.

115. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Rimm E, Wolk A, Colditz GA,
Hennekens CH, Willett WC: Dietary intake of alpha-linolenic
acid and risk of ischemic heart disease among women. Am J Clin
Nutr 69:890–897, 1999.

116. Connor WE: Alpha-linolenic acid in health and disease [Com-

ment]. Am J Clin Nutr 69:827–8, 1999.

117. Garg ML, Wierzbicki AA, Thomson ABR, Clandinin MT: Di-
etary saturated fat level alters the competition between alpha-
linolenic and linoleic acid. Lipids 24:334–339, 1989.

118. Chan JK, McDonald BE, Gerrard JM, Bruce VM, Weaver BJ,
Holub BJ: Effect of dietary alpha-linolenic acid and its ratio to
linoleic acid on platelet and plasma fatty acids and thrombogen-
esis. Lipids 28:811–817, 1993.

119. Kinsella JE: Effects of polyunsaturated fatty acids on factors
related to cardiovascular disease. Am J Cardiol 60:23G–32G,
1987.

120. Kinsella JE: Food lipids and fatty acids: Importance in food
quality, nutrition, and health. Food Technol 42:124–145, 1988.
121. Nair SSD, Leitch JW, Falconer J, Garg ML: Prevention of cardiac
arrhythmia by dietary (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids and their
mechanism of action. J Nutr 127:383–393, 1997.

18

VOL. 20, NO. 1

122. Berry EM: Dietary fatty acids in the management of diabetes

mellitus. Am J Clin Nutr 66:991S–997S, 1997.

123. Krauss RM, Eckel RH, Howard B, Appel LJ, Daniels SR, Deck-
elbaum RJ, Erdman Jr JW, Kris-Etherton P, Goldberg IJ, Kotchen
TA, Lichtenstein AH, Mitch WE, Mullis R, Robinson K, Wylie-
Rosett J, St Jeor S, Suttie J, Tribble DL, Bazzarre TL: AHA
Dietary Guidelines Revision 2000: A Statement for Healthcare
Professionals from the Nutrition Committee of the American
Heart Association. Circulation 102:2284–2299, 2000.

124. Stamler J, Shekelle R: Dietary cholesterol and human coronary

heart disease. Arch Pathol Lab Med 112:1032–1040, 1988.

125. Hegsted DM, McGandy RB, Myers ML, Stare FJ: Quantitative
effects of dietary fat on serum cholesterol in man. Am J Clin Nutr
17:281–295, 1965.

126. Clarke R, Frost C, Collins R, Appleby P, Peto R: Dietary lipids
and blood cholesterol: quantitative meta-analysis of metabolic
ward studies. BMJ 314:112–117, 1997.

127. Howell WH, McNamara DJ, Tosca MA, Smith BT, Gaines JA:
Plasma lipid and lipoprotein responses to dietary fat and choles-
terol: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 65:1747–1764, 1997.

128. McGill HC: The relationship of dietary cholesterol to serum
cholestrol concentration and to atherosclerosis in man. Am J Clin
Nutr 32:2664–2702, 1979.

129. Hegsted DM: Serum-cholesterol response to dietary cholesterol: a

re-evaluation. Am J Clin Nutr 44:299–305, 1986.

130. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Rimm E, Colditz GA, Rosner
BA, Hennekens CH, Willett WC: Dietary fat intake and the risk
of coronary heart disease in women. N Engl J Med 337:1491–
1499, 1997.

131. National Cholesterol Education Program: Report of the Expert
Panel on Population Strategies for Blood Cholesterol Reduction:
Executive Summary. Arch Intern Med 151:1071–1084, 1991.

132. Krauss RM, Deckelbaum RJ, Ernst N, Fisher E, Howard BV,
Knopp RH, Kotchen T, Lichtenstein AH, McGill HC, Pearson
TA, Prewitt TE, Stone NJ, Van Horn L, Weinberg R: Dietary
guidelines for healthy American adults: A statement for health

Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease

professionals from the nutrition committee, American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation 94:1795–1800, 1996.

133. Hopkins PN: Effects of dietary cholesterol on serum cholesterol:
a meta-analysis and review. Am J Clin Nutr 55:1060–1070, 1992.
134. Dawber TR, Nickerson RJ, Brand FN, Pool J: Eggs, serum
cholesterol, and coronary heart disease. Am J Clin Nutr 36:617–
625, 1982.

135. Snowdon DA, Phillips RL, Fraser GE: Meat consumption and

fatal ischemic heart disease. Prev Med 13:490–500, 1984.

136. Fraser GE: Diet and coronary heart disease: beyond dietary fats
and low-density-lipoprotein cholesterol. Am J Clin Nutr 59
(Suppl):1117S–1123S, 1994.

137. Gramenzi A, Gentile A, Fasoli M, Negri E, Parazzini F, La
Vecchia C: Association between certain foods and risk of acute
myocardial infarction in women. BMJ 300:771–773, 1990.

138. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Rimm EB, Manson JE, Ascherio A, Colditz
GA, Rosner BA, Spiegelman D, Speizer FE, Sacks FM, Hennek-
ens CH, Willett WC: A prospective study of egg consumption and
risk of cardiovascular disease in men and women. JAMA 281:
1387–1394, 1999.

139. Sacks F, Salazar J, Miller L, Foster JM, Sutherland M, Samonds
KW, Albers JJ, Kass EH: Ingestion of egg raises plasma low
density lipoproteins in free-living subjects. Lancet 647–649,
1984.

140. Hopkins PN: Effects of dietary cholesterol on serum cholesterol:
a meta-analysis and review. Am J Clin Nutr 55:1060–1070, 1992.
141. Willett WC: Is dietary fat a major determinant of body fat? Am J

Clin Nutr 67:556S–562S, 1998.

142. Roberts SB: High-glycemic index foods, hunger, and obesity: is

there a connection? Nutr Rev 58:163–169, 2000.

143. US Department of Agriculture—US Department of Health and
Human Services: “Nutrition and your health: Dietary guidelines
for Americans.” Homes and Garden Bulletin No. 232. Washing-
ton, DC: US Government Printing Office, 2000.

Received November 2, 2000; revision accepted November 22,
2000

JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF NUTRITION

19

