464

Prospective study of alcohol consumption and risk

of coronary disease in men

male 

Although an  inverse association  between alcohol
consumption and risk of coronary artery disease has
been consistently found in several types of studies,
some have argued that the association is due at least
partly to the inclusion in the non-drinking reference
group of men who abstain because of pre-existing
disease.  The  association  between  self-reported
alcohol  intake  and coronary disease  was studied
prospectively  among  51 529 
health
professionals.  In  1986 the participants completed
questionnaires about food and alcohol  intake and
medical history, heart disease risk factors, and dietary
changes  in  the  previous 10  years.  Follow-up
questionnaires  in  1988 sought information  about
newly diagnosed coronary disease. 350 confirmed
cases of coronary disease occurred. After adjustment
for coronary risk factors, including dietary intake of
cholesterol, fat, and dietary fibre, increasing alcohol
intake  was inversely  related  to  coronary  disease
incidence (p for trend <0&middot;001).  Exclusion of 10 302
current non-drinkers or 16 342 men with disorders
potentially  related  to  coronary  disease  (eg,
hypertension, diabetes, and gout) which might have
led  men to  reduce  their  alcohol  intake,  did  not
substantially affect the relative risks. These findings
support  the  hypothesis  that  the  inverse  relation
between alcohol consumption and risk of coronary
disease is causal.

Introduction

An inverse association between alcohol consumption and
risk  of coronary  artery  disease  is  well  documented  in
necropsy,  geographic, case-control,  and cohort  studies. 1
Despite the consistency of the findings, some have argued
that the association may be due, at least partly, to the use of a
reference group of non-drinkers which may include heavy
drinkers who deny their alcohol intake or people who have
stopped drinking because of illness.2,3 Although alcohol
consumption varies with dietary habits,4 dietary intake has
been considered in only a few studies of alcohol intake and
coronary  disease.  We  have  therefore  examined
prospectively, with control for diet and other risk factors, the
relation of alcohol consumption to risk of coronary disease
among men without pre-existing cancer and cardiovascular
disorders. An analysis of alcohol and cardiovascular disease
in women, with a similar study design, has been reported
elsewhere.’

Subjects and methods

The Health  Professionals  Follow-up  Study is  a  prospective
investigation  of dietary  aetiologies  of heart  disease  and cancer

among 51 529 men, aged 40-75 years. The population consists of
29 683 dentists, 10 098 veterinary surgeons, 4185 pharmacists, 3745
optometrists, 2218 osteopathic physicians, and 1600 podiatrists.
The study began in  1986 when cohort members completed a
detailed food-frequency questionnaire and provided information
about medical history; heart disease risk factors, and dietary changes
during the previous 10 years. Follow-up questionnaires were sent in
1988 to elicit information on newly diagnosed coronary disease.

We excluded from this analysis 1530 men who did not report an
average daily food intake of 3 35-17 6 MJ (800-4200 kcal) and who
did not eat more than 70 food items on the dietary questionnaire.
We also excluded 5940 men who reported a diagnosis of cancer
(except non-melanoma skin cancer), myocardial infarction, angina,
stroke, or coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) or percutaneous
transluminal  coronary  angioplasty  (PTCA)  on  the  1986
questionnaire. 44 059 men were followed for disease incidencein
the subsequent 2 years.

After  repeated  mailings  to  non-respondents  to  the  1988
questionnaire, including the use of certified mail,8 we confirmed the
deaths of 384 participants and received questionnaires from 96% of
the  remaining  eligible  participants.  The  1693  non-responding
participants were assumed to be alive since they were not listed in
the National Death Index.

The 131-item semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire
included questions about average consumption during the past year
of beer, white wine, red wine, and spirits.  The nine frequency
response categories ranged from never or less than once per month
to 6 times or more per day. Standard specified portion sizes were 1
glass, bottle, or can for beer, 4 ounce (118 ml) glass for wine, and 1
measure for spirits. Alcohol and nutrient intakes were calculated
from the frequency of consumption multiplied by the nutrient
content of each food or beverage.9-11 The estimated alcohol content
for beer was 13-2 g, for wine 10-8 g, and for spirits 15-1 g.11 Total
daily alcohol intake was calculated as the sum from all alcoholic
beverages.

We assessed the validity of the food frequency questionnaire in a
random sample of men living in the Boston area who had completed
the  baseline  food  frequency  questionnaire  and  a  second food
frequency questionnaire about  1  year later. 10,11,13  We compared
alcohol  intake  as  measured  by  the  first  and  second  dietary
questionnaires with alcohol intake from 14  iays of diet records
(collected  between  the  two  dietary  questionnaires)."  The
Spearman correlation coefficient (rs) for alcohol intake between the
first dietary questionnaire and the diet records was 0-83 and that for
the second questionnaire and the diet records 086. Alcohol intake
calculated  from the  second  food frequency  questionnaire  was
significantly  associated  with the plasma concentrations of high
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (r = 0-35, p = 0’0001).

The questionnaire also provided a useful measure of other dietary
intake. The correlations, adjusted for within-person variation in
diet records/4 between nutrients from the second food frequency
questionnaire and nutrients from the dietary records were 0 76 for

ADDRESSES  Departments  of  Epidemiology,  Nutrition,  and
Biostatistics,  Harvard School of Public Health and Channing
Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School
and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA (E  B  Rimm, ScD, E  L Giovannucci, MD, W. C Willett, MD, G. A
Colditz,  MB, A.  Ascherio,  MD, B.  Rosner,  PhD,  M. J.  Stampfer, MD)
Correspondence  to  Dr  Eric  B  Rimm,  Department of  Epidemiology,
Harvard  School  of  Public  Health,  677  Huntington Avenue,  Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

TABLE I-BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS*, ACCORDING TO ALCOHOL INTAKE, OF STUDY PARTICIPANTS

465

*Age-ad]usted by direct standardlsatlon to the cohort of 44 059 men free from cardiovascular disease and cancer.
tExcluding calones from alcohol.

cholesterol, 0-75 for saturated fat, 0-68 for monounsaturated fat,
0-37 for polyunsaturated fat, and 0-68 for dietary fibre.10

criteria15-symptoms 

Fatal coronary disease, non-fatal myocardial infarction, CABG,
and PCTA occurring between the return of the baseline  1986
questionnaire and Jan 31, 1988, were considered as endpoints for
this analysis. We wrote to participants who reported an incident
myocardial infarction on the  1988 questionnaire to  confirm the
report and to request permission to review medical records.  A
myocardial infarction  was "confirmed" if it  met World Health
Organisation 
typical
electrocardiographic changes or high levels of cardiac enzymes. A
myocardial infarction was classified as "probable" if the medical
records could not be obtained, but the participant required hospital
admission and the diagnosis  was corrobated by supplementary
correspondence  or telephone  interview.  We requested medical
records from a sample of participants reporting a CABG or PTCA.
Because 98 of the 102 (96 %) self-reported events were confirmed by
medical record,  we accepted self-report of all  other CABGs or
PTCAs as coronary disease endpoints.

either 

plus 

the incidence rate among non-drinkers (unless otherwise noted).
Relative risk estimates were adjusted for age (5-year categories) and
smoking (never, past, less than 15 cigarettes/day, 15-24 cigarettes/
day, and more than 24 cigarettes/day) by means of the Mantel-
Haenszel summary estimator. 16 The Mantel extension test17  was
calculated to test for a linear trend with increasing alcohol intake.
Multiple  logistic  regression  analysis  was  used  to  control
simultaneously for other potential risk factors of coronary disease.
From the model with separate continuous variables representing
alcohol from each beverage source, the Wald test  was used to
examine differences between logistic regression coefficients (the
difference of the logistic coefficients divided by its standard error is
approximately normally distributed).

Results

Among the 44 059  men eligible  for  analysis,  23-4%
reported that they consumed alcoholic beverages never or
less than once per month, 26-4% drank more than 15 g of
alcohol (more than one drink per day), and 3-5 % drank more
than 50 g per day (more than 3  to  4 drinks).  Baseline
characteristics and potential risk factors according to level of
alcohol  intake  are  shown in  table  1.  The prevalence of
hypertension  was  similar  among  abstainers  and  light
drinkers, but higher in men with intake of more than 30
g/day. Diabetes was more common among abstainers than
those who drank alcohol. Men with higher alcohol intakes
consumed more fat and cholesterol and less dietary fibre
than men with lower alcohol intakes.

After  72 290 person-years  of follow-up,  350 incident
coronary  events  were  ascertained-164  non-fatal
myocardial infarctions (136 definite and 28 probable), 50
coronary disease deaths (including 12 sudden deaths), and
136 CABG or PTCA procedures.

The relative risks of coronary artery disease by category of
alcohol intake are shown in table n. Average daily alcohol
intake was inversely related to risk of non-fatal myocardial
infarction and fatal coronary heart disease. Since there were
only 22 deaths in drinking categories over 5 g the relative risk
estimates have wide confidence intervals (95% CI). CABG
and PTCA were also less frequent with increasing alcohol
consumption. For all total coronary artery events combined

Most deaths were reported by next of kin, work associates, or
postal authorities. In addition, the National Death Index was used
to  identify  deceased  cohort  members  among persistent  non-
responders  to  the  questionnaire  mailings.  A death  from  a
myocardial  infarction  was confirmed from medical  records  or
necropsy  reports.  Fatal  coronary  disease  was  also  considered
confirmed if it was listed as the primary cause of death on the death
certificate and if a diagnosis of incident coronary disease (after Jan 1,
1986) could be confirmed from hospital records or interviews from
the next of kin. The cause listed on the death certificate was not
sufficient  alone to confirm a death  as  due to  coronary disease.
Sudden death was defined as death within 1  h of the onset of
symptoms when no previous serious illness was reported and no
other plausible cause of death (other than coronary disease) was
reported. Because a large proportion of sudden deaths in men are
from coronary events, sudden deaths were included in the fatal
infarction category; however, primary analyses were repeated with
sudden deaths  excluded.  For subjects  with multiple endpoints
during the follow-up period, only the first event was included in the
analysis. Physicians reviewing medical records were unaware of the
subjects’ reported alcohol intake.

Each participant contributed person-months of follow-up from
the day the baseline questionnaire was returned until a confirmed
cardiovascular event, death, or Jan 31, 1988. Relative risk estimates
were calculated as the incidence rate of coronary artery disease
among men in different categories of alcohol intake compared with

466

TABLE II-RELATIVE RISKS (RR) OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE, ACCORDING TO AVERAGE DAILY ALCOHOL INTAKE

*Ad)usted for age and smoking status
tRisk factors m the logistic model family history of myocardial infarction (before age 60, age 60 or older), current smoking status (including 1 -14, 15-24, and 25 cigarettes per
day),  age,  body  mass index,  profession,  self-reported  diabetes,  hypertension,  or  high  cholesterol,  quintiles  of  dietary  intake  of  cholesterol,  dietary  fibre,  saturated,
monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fat, and energy mtake

(n = 350), there was a highly significant inverse trend in risk
with alcohol consumption (chi trend= -387, p=00001).
Control for potential risk factors  in multivariate analysis
only slightly changed the relative risks. The strength of the
association between alcohol intake and subsequent coronary
artery disease did not change appreciably when we excluded
2209 men who had not answered any of the four alcoholic
beverage questions on the questionnaire, when we removed
the indication for self-reported hypertension (a plausible
intermediate variable), or when we excluded cases of sudden
death (n = 12) or probable myocardial infarction (n = 28).

Alcohol abstainers may not represent an ideal reference
group  because  of the  possible  inclusion  of past  heavy
drinkers, current drinkers who deny their intake, or men
who stopped drinking because of illness.  To address this
possible bias, we excluded the 5693 men who reported in
1986 that they had substantially decreased their drinking in
the past 10 years and who did not drink in 1986 (past heavy
drinkers). The relative risks were almost identical to those
for the whole cohort. For example, the multivariate relative
risk was 0-47 (95% CI 0-29-0-77) for total coronary disease
among men drinking more than 30 g of alcohol per day
(compared with 0-53 [0-35-0-79] for the whole cohort).

In a further analysis, we excluded all non-drinkers and
recalculated the linear test for trend and multivariate relative
risks of alcohol and coronary artery disease. Again, alcohol

remained inversely associated with coronary artery disease
(X = - 3-46,  p = 00005,  across  all  categories  of alcohol
consumption, excluding non-drinkers). With light drinkers
only (0-1-5-0 g/day) as the comparison group, the relative
risk for total coronary disease was 0-58 among men drinking
30-50 g/day (95% CI 0-37-0-90, table ill).  Although we
initially excluded men with previously reported coronary
disease, stroke, or cancer, we carried out further analyses
also  excluding  16 242  men with  an  array  of medical
conditions that may be related to risk of coronary disease risk
(see figure). Although these criteria excluded over half tiie
incident  cases  of coronary  disease  (only  142  total  cases
remained), we still  found a significant inverse association
between alcohol consumption and coronary artery disease
incidence (x = - 2 -29, p = 0-02) with relative risk estimates
of similar magnitude to those presented in table II (figure).
For example,  the  multivariate  relative  risk  of coronary
disease was 0-61 (95% CI 0-32-1-17) among men drinking
more than 30 g/day compared with non-drinkers.

The average number of days per week on which alcohol
was consumed was also inversely associated with risk of
coronary  artery  disease  (data  not  shown).  Men who
reported drinking on average on 3-4 days per week had a
relative risk of 0-66 (95% CI 0-46-0-96) compared with men
who drank on less than 1 day a week. Because total alcohol
intake and average number of days per week on which

TABLE III-RELATIVE RISK (RR) OF TOTAL CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE WITH ABSTAINERS OR LIGHT DRINKERS AS THE REFERENCE

CATEGORY ACCORDING TO AVERAGE DAILY ALCOHOL INTAKE

467

coronary disease, although few have controlled for dietary
intake, so the potential for confounding between alcohol,
diet, and coronary disease remains.

Bias  is  unlikely  to  explain  the  inverse  association  we
found. The dietary questionnaire reliably measures alcohol
intake."  The prospective nature of the study precludes
recall bias. We achieved 96% follow-up in men eligible for
this analysis, so our results are probably not biased by men
lost to follow-up.

A possible limitation of this analysis is the short follow-up
period between alcohol reporting and incident coronary
artery  disease;  however,  a  shorter  interval  reduces  the
possibility  of misclassification  of alcohol  intake  due  to
changes during follow-up. Other prospective studies have
used a single dietary measure and followed men from 4-75
years to 22 years and still found an inverse association for
alcohoI,1 Among men who completed our 1990 follow-up
questionnaire,  the  Spearman  correlation  was  0-84  for
alcohol intake over 4 years. Thus, alcohol intake as assessed
on the baseline  1986 questionnaire is  a good measure of
alcohol consumption over a long time.

The knowledge of pre-existing disease  at the baseline
assessment of alcohol intake could bias the dose-response
curve between alcohol and coronary artery  disease if  an
individual had reduced alcohol consumption because of
perceived  disease  status.  In  our  primary  analysis,  we
excluded all men with any baseline self-report of myocardial
infarction, angina, CABG, PTCA, stroke,  or cancer.  In
addition,  we  controlled  for  self-reported  physician-
diagnosed diabetes, hypertension, and high cholesterol in
multivariate  models  (table  II).  Furthermore,  we found
significant  inverse  trends  with  increasing  alcohol
consumption among the subset of 33 657 men who reported
any alcohol consumption and among a separate subset of
27 717  men with  no  baseline  cardiovascular  disease  or
related diagnoses (figure).

Shaper has argued that the reference group of alcohol
abstainers or low consumers is typically contaminated with
subjects who have reduced alcohol consumption because of
pre-existing disease. When men who recalled a diagnosis of
cardiovascular  or  "cardiovascular-related"  disorders
(23-8% of participants) were excluded from analysis in the
British Regional Heart Study, 18 there was no association
between alcohol consumption and cardiovascular mortality,
with control for age, social class, and cigarette smoking.
However,  there  were  few  non-drinking  men  in  that
subgroup of healthy participants and only 6 cases of fatal
coronary disease occurred among them. Moreover, Shaper
et  al  have reported that  alcohol  consumption is  highly
correlated  with  both  social  class  (r=0-72)  and  heavy
smoking (r =0-71) in that population.19 Therefore, with few
non-drinkers and reduced variability in alcohol intake after
statistical  adjustment for highly correlated variables,  the
confidence  intervals  around their  relative  risk  estimates
(which were not given) would be wide and would include a
substantial  association in either  direction.  Wannamethee
and Shaper recommend use of men who drink fewer than 15
drinks per week as a reference group.20 This reference group
would include levels of alcohol consumption for which we
and others have found a substantial reduction in risk. The
wide variation  of alcohol  intake  (table  1)  in  the Health
Professionals  Follow-up  Study,  in  addition  to  the  low
frequency of smoking (less than 10% are current smokers)
and  similar  socioeconomic  status,  provide  a  better
opportunity to assess the association between alcohol and
coronary disease.

Relative risks of alcohol consumption and coronary artery
disease  among  men  from  the  Health  Professionals
Follow-up Study.
0=44059 men free  of  myocardial  infarction,  angina,  CABG or

PCTA, stroke, and cancer (except non-melanoma skin cancer)

<= Cohort 

without  16 242  men  who,  at  baseline,  reported
myocardial infarction, angina, CABG, PCTA, stroke,  cancer (except
non-melanoma skin cancer), gout,  diabetes,  high cholesterol,  high
triglycerides,  hypertension, tachycardia,  heart  rhythm disturbances,
or other heart disturbances.

alcohol was consumed were so highly correlated (r = 0-89),
the two predictors were not modelled simultaneously.

We also  separately  examined the association  between
alcohol  from beer,  wine,  or spirits  and coronary artery
disease.  Increasing  consumption  of  alcohol  from  each
beverage type was inversely related to risk of coronary artery
disease.  However,  alcohol  from  spirits  had  the  most
pronounced inverse association (p for trend = 00004). In a
logistic model to control simultaneously for alcohol from
each source, the associations between alcohol (continuous
variables) from beer, wine, or spirits with risk of coronary
artery disease did not differ significantly. However, again,
the strongest association was found for men drinking spirits.
The multivariate relative risk of coronary artery disease was
0-55 (0-39-0-77) for men who drank 30-2 g (2 drinks) of
spirits per day compared with men who did not drink spirits.
The inverse association between alcohol and coronary
artery disease did not appreciably differ by age or smoking
status.

Discussion

Our results, from a large prospective study among men,
provide strong evidence for  the hypothesis that  alcohol
intake is inversely associated with coronary artery disease.
Moderate alcohol consumption was consistently associated
with  a  reduced  risk  of fatal  and  non-fatal  myocardial
infarction and CABG or PTCA. This association was not
explained by a reduction in alcohol consumption among
men with known coronary risk factors or by the inclusion of
former heavy drinkers in the non-drinking category.

Moore and Pearson have reviewed reports on the relation
between  alcohol  and  coronary  artery  disease.  Inverse
associations  have  been found in  most case-control  and
cohort studies between moderate alcohol consumption and

468

In populations  whose intakes  of fat,  cholesterol,  and
dietary fibre vary with alcohol consumption,4-<> 
diet may
distort the relation  between alcohol and coronary artery
disease. With dietary data from eighteen countries, Hegsted
and Ausman2l found that the best multiple regression model
to predict coronary heart disease mortality included dietary
variables for saturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, and alcohol.
An inverse  association  was found between alcohol  and
coronary heart disease in the Nurses’ Health Study after
control  for  dietary  cholesterol  and  saturated  and
polyunsaturated fat, as well as other potential risk factors.’ 7
Because alcohol drinkers tend to consume diets higher in fat
and  lower  in  dietary  fibre  (table  I),  control  for  diet
strengthened associations  between alcohol  and coronary
disease.

One of the  proposed  mechanisms by which alcohol
reduces  coronary artery  disease  is  through raising  high
density lipoprotein (HDL) concentrations.1 When given in
experimental studies, even reasonable amounts of alcohol,
such as 39 g/day for 6 weeks, increased HDL by 17%.22 A
change in  HDL of this  magnitude could account for  a
reduction in risk of perhaps 40%,23 which is similar to our
findings. Although alcohol was originally thought only to
increase HDL-3 subfractions,24 positive correlations with
both  HDL-2  and  HDL-3  subfractions  have  been
reported.25,26  Moreover,  both  HDL-2  and  HDL-3
subfractions are associated with a reduced risk of coronary
artery disease.23,27,28

The men in the Health Professionals Follow-up Study are
generally health conscious. However, alcohol consumption
patterns in this cohort are similar to those among the US
general  population.  Roughly  33%  of  the  general  US
population abstain from alcohol and 91 % drink less than 30
g/day29 (in the Health Professionals Follow-up study 23-4%
abstain and 87-8% drink less than 30 g/day). Therefore, our
results may be applicable to a wider population of men.

Because only a small percentage of the cohort drank 50 g
or more per day, the Health Professionals Follow-up Study
has  limited  power to  study the  health  effects  of heavy
drinking. As suggested by others,l the risk of coronary artery
disease  may  increase  at  very  high  levels  of  alcohol
consumption.  However,  within  the  range  of  alcohol
consumption  in  this  cohort,  we  found  a  continuous
decreasing risk of coronary artery disease with increasing
alcohol levels. Our results do not address the consequences
of increasing alcohol consumption over time or of other
potential  disease  outcomes unrelated  to  coronary artery
disease. Many other studies have shown the severe adverse
health consequences of excessive drinking and alcoholism. 30
Our findings provide additional evidence to support the
hypothesis that moderate alcohol consumption reduces the
risk of coronary artery disease. The inverse association was
not an artifact due to pre-existing disease or differences in
dietary  habits.  The  magnitude  of  the  association,
consistency with results from other studies, and plausible
biological  mechanisms strongly  suggest that  the inverse
association  between moderate alcohol intake and risk  of
coronary disease is causal.

This study was supported by research grant HL 35464 from the National
Institutes  of Health. E. B.  R. was supported by a National Institute of
Environmental Health Services research service award 5T32 E507069 from
the Harvard School of Public Health. We thank the participants of the Health
Professionals  Follow-up  Study  for  their  continued  cooperation  and
participation; and Ms Mary Johnson, Mr Mark Shneyder, Mr Steve Stuart,
Ms Betsy Frost-Hawes, Ms Mitzi Wolff, Ms Karen Corsano, Ms Mira
Koyfman, Ms Jan Vomacka, Ms Cindy Dyer, and Dr Chris Chute for help
with compiling the data and preparing the paper.

REFERENCES

1. Moore RD, Pearson TA. Moderate alcohol consumption and coronary

artery disease. Medicine 1986; 65: 242-67.

2. Shaper AG. Alcohol and mortality: a review of prospective studies. Br J

Addict 1990; 85: 837-47.

3. Criqui M. The reduction of coronary heart disease with light to moderate
alcohol consumption: effect or artifact? Br J Addict 1990; 85: 854-57.
4. Thomson M, Fulton M, Elton RA, et al.  Alcohol consumption and
nutrient intake in middle-aged Scottish men. Am J Clin Nutr 1988; 47:
139-45.

5. Jones BR, Barrett-Connor E, Criqui MH, et al. A community study of
calorie and nutrient intake in drinkers and nondrinkers of alcohol.
Am J Clin Nutr 1982; 35: 135-39.

6. Colditz GA, Giovannucci E, Rimm EB, et al. Alcohol intake in relation to
diet and obesity among women and men. Am J Clin Nutr (in press).
7. Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Speizer FE, Hennekens CH. A
prospective study of moderate alcohol consumption and the risk of
coronary disease  and stroke in  women. N Engl J Med 1988; 319:
267-73.

8. Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, et al.  Effectiveness of various
mailing strategies  among non-respondents in  a prospective cohort
study. Am J Epidemiol 1990; 131: 1068-71.

9. Willett WC, Sampson L, Stampfer MJ, et al. Reproducibility and validity
of a semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire. Am J Epidemiol
1985; 122: 51-65.

10. Rimm EB, Giovannucci E, Stampfer MJ, et al.  Reproducibility and
validity  of  a  expanded  self-administered  semiquantitative  food
frequency questionnaire  among male healthy professionals.  Am J
Epidemiol (in press).

11. Giovannucci E, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ, et al.  The assessment of
alcohol  consumption by a simple  self-administered  questionnaire.
Am J Epidemiol 1991; 133: 810-17.

12. Consumer  and  Food  Economics  Institute.  Composition  of foods:
handbook 8 series. Washington, DC: US Department of Agriculture,
1976-1989.

13. Hunter DJ, Rimm EB, Sacks F, et al. Comparison of measures of fatty
acid intake by subcutaneous fat aspirate, food frequency questionnaire,
and diet records. Am J Epidemiol (in press).

14. Rosner B, Willett WC. Interval estimates for correlation coefficients
corrected for within-person variation: implications for study design and
hypothesis testing. Am J Epidemiol 1988; 127: 377-86.

15. Rose  GA, Blackburn  H.  Cardiovascular  survey  methods,  2nd ed.
Monograph series no 58. Geneva: World Health Organisation, 1982.

16. Rothman KJ. Modem epidemiology. Boston: Little, Brown, 1986.
17. Mantel N. Chi-square tests with one degree of freedom: extensions of the

Mantel-Haenszel procedure. J Am Stat Assoc 1963; 58: 690-700.

18. Shaper AG, Wannamethee G, Walker M. Alcohol and mortality of
British men: explaining the U-shaped curve. Lancet 1988; ii:  1267-73.
19. Shaper AG, Pocock SJ, Walker M, et al. British Regional Heart Study:
cardiovascular risk factors in midle-aged men in 24 towns. Br Med J
1981; 283: 179-86.

20. Wannamethee G, Shaper AG. Men who do not drink: a report from the

British Regional Heart Study. Int J Epidemiol 1988; 17: 307-16.

21. Hegsted DM, Ausman LM. Diet, alcohol, and coronary heart disease in

men. J Nutr 1988; 118: 1184-89.

22. Thorton J, Symes C, Heaton K. Moderate alcohol intake reduces bile
cholesterol  saturation and raises HDL cholesterol. Lancet 1983; ii:
819-22.

23. Stampfer MJ, Sacks F, Salvini S, et al. A prospective study of lipids and
apolipoproteins and risk of myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 1991;
325: 373-81.

24. Haskell WL, Camargo C Jr, Williams PT, et al. The effect of cessation
and resumption of moderate alcohol intake on serum high-density-
lipoprotein subfractions. A controlled study. N Engl J Med 1984; 310:
805-10.

25. Haskell WL, Camargo C Jr, Williams PT, et al. The effect of cessation
and resumption of moderate alcohol intake on serum high-density-
lipoprotein  subfractions:  a  controlled  study.  JAMA 1985;  253:
2854-57.

26. Valimaki M, Nikkila EA, Taskinen A, et al.  Rapid decrease in high
density lipoprotein subfractions and post heparin plasma lipase activity
after  cessation  of chronic  alcohol  intake.  Atherosclerosis  1986;  59:
147-53.

27. Miller GJ, Miller NE. Plasma-high-density-lipoproteins concentration

and development of ischaemic heart disease. Lancet 1975; i:  16-19.

28. Ballantyne FC, Clark RS, Simpson HS, et al.  High density and low
density lipoprotein subfractions in survivors of myocardial infarction
and in control subjects. Metabolism 1982; 31: 433-37.

29. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. The sixth special
report to the US Congress on alcohol and health from the Secretary of
Health and Human Services. 1987 DHHS publ no (ADM) 87-1519.
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.

30. The Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition and Health. 1988 DHSS
publ no 88-50210. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.

