AMPK as a metabolic tumor 
suppressor: control of metabolism 
and cell growth

Zhijun Luo†, Mengwei Zang & Wen Guo
†Author for correspondence: Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany 
Street, Evans 645, Boston, MA 02118, USA n Tel.: +1 617 414 1033 n Fax: +1 617 414 1646 n zluo@bu.edu

AMPK  is  an  evolutionarily  conserved  fuel-sensing  enzyme  that  is  activated  in 
shortage of energy and suppressed in its surfeit. AMPK activation stimulates fatty 
acid  oxidation,  enhances  insulin  sensitivity,  alleviates  hyperglycemia  and 
hyperlipidemia,  and  inhibits  proinflammatory  changes.  Thus,  AMPK  is  a  well-
received therapeutic target for metabolic syndrome and Type 2 diabetes. Recent 
studies indicate that AMPK plays a role in linking metabolic syndrome and cancer. 
AMPK  is  an  essential  mediator  of  the  tumor  suppressor  LKB1  and  could  be 
suppressed  in  cancer  cells  containing  loss-of-function  mutations  of  LKB1  or 
containing active mutations of B-Raf, or in cancers associated with metabolic 
syndrome. The activation of AMPK reprograms cellular metabolism and enforces 
metabolic checkpoints by acting on mTORC1, p53, fatty acid synthase and other 
molecules  for  regulating  cell  growth  and  metabolism.  In  keeping  with  in  vitro 
studies, recent epidemiological studies indicate that the incidence of cancer is 
reduced  in  Type  2  diabetes  treated  with  metformin,  an  AMPK  activator.  Thus, 
AMPK is emerging as an interesting metabolic tumor suppressor and a promising 
target for cancer prevention and therapy.

AMP-activated  protein  kinase  acts  as  a  fuel 
gauge that is activated under stresses such as 
hypoxia,  ischemia,  glucose  deprivation  and 
exercise  [1].  Activation  of  AMPK  stimulates 
fatty acid oxidation to generate more ATP to 
cope with acute energy demand and inhibits 
anabolic processes that consume ATP [1]. As a 
result, energy is preserved for acute cellular pro-
grams. In addition, AMPK activation enhances 
insulin sensitivity, inhibits hepatic glucose pro-
duction, stimulates glucose uptake in muscle, 
inhibits fatty acid synthesis and esterification, 
and diminishes proinflammatory changes  [2]. 
Thus, AMPK is a well-accepted target for the 
treatment of metabolic syndrome and Type 2 
diabetes (for extensive reviews, refer to  [1–3]). 
During the last 5 years, since our first review [3], 
great attention has been drawn to link AMPK 
and cancer, and substantial progress has been 
made. AMPK, by regulating a variety of down-
stream targets, such as mTORC1, p53 and fatty 
acid synthase (FASN), and associated metabolic 
processes, controls intra cellular energy levels 
in order to maintain the cell growth rate at an 
appropriate level. Likewise, AMPK activation 
under  metabolic  stress  or  by  pharmacologi-
cal activators can regulate various processes, 
including cell cycle checkpoint, cell polarity, 
senescence, autophagy and apoptosis  [4–7]. In 
this article, we aim to summarize recent evi-
dence  in  support  of  the  notion  that  AMPK 

serves  as  a  metabolic  tumor  suppressor  and 
discuss the implications of AMPK in cancer 
prevention and treatment. 

Activation of AMPK
AMP-activated protein kinase belongs to a family 
of serine/threonine protein kinases and is highly 
conserved from yeast to human. It consists of 
three subunits: a catalytic subunit (a) and two 
regulatory  subunits  (b  and  g)  [8,9].  In  mam-
mals, each subunit of AMPK contains two to 
three isoforms (a1, a2; b1, b2; g1, g2 and g3). 
When cells confront metabolic stress, the intra-
cellular AMP level or the ratio of AMP to ATP 
is increased. AMP then binds to the g-subunit, 
yielding two outcomes; first, it serves as allo-
steric activator and second, it protects AMPK 
against phosphatases to dephosphorylate threo-
nine 172 in the activation loop of the catalytic 
a-subunit [9–11]. Another critical step for AMPK 
activation is the phosphorylation of threonine 
172. Previous studies suggest that AMP binding 
enables the phosphorylation of threonine 172 by 
an upstream kinase [12,13]. However, this notion 
is challenged by recent in vitro studies showing 
that phosphorylation of AMPK by purified LKB1 
complex is independent of AMP [11,14]. A possible 
explanation of this discrepancy is that the AMPK 
preparations used in previous studies may have 
been contaminated with phosphatases, of which 
the activity toward AMPK is inhibited by AMP.

r

F
u
t
u
e
O
n
c
o
o
g
y

 

l

R
e
v
e
w

i

Keywords

n acetyl CoA carboxylase 
n AMPK n fatty acid synthase 
n LKB1 n metabolic syndrome 
n metabolism n mTOR n p53 
n tumor suppressor 
n tumorigenesis

10.2217/FON.09.174  © 2010 Future Medicine Ltd 

Future Oncol. (2010) 6(3), 457–470

ISSN 1479-6694

457

part ofFor reprint orders, please contact: reprints@futuremedicine.com