Cellular Proliferation, Apoptosis and

Angiogenesis: Molecular Targets for Nutritional

Preemption of Cancer

Cindy D. Davis, Nancy J. Emenaker, and John A. Milner

Malignant cells are characterized by abnormal signaling pathways involving proliferation, apoptosis,
and angiogenesis. These cancer centric pathways are known to be modiﬁed by several bioactive
dietary components, although admittedly there are inconsistencies in the response. The response
is dependent on the amount and duration of exposure to the dietary component and the cell type.
While caution should be exercised when extrapolating in vitro data to in vivo conditions, such
studies do provide valuable insights into plausible mechanisms. Signiﬁcant gene–nutrient and
nutrient–nutrient interactions may contribute to the uncertainty of the response to foods and/or
their components. One of the challenges is the identiﬁcation of which process(es), either singly or
in combination, is/are most important in leading to a dietary-mediated phenotypic change. The
dearth of controlled intervention studies that have investigated molecular targets for nutritional
preemption in humans make ﬁrm dietary recommendations difﬁcult. Until more deﬁnite informa-
tion surfaces, a balanced but varied diet is most prudent.
Semin Oncol 37:243-257. Published by Elsevier Inc.

Evidence continues to mount that altering dietary

habits is an effective and cost-efﬁcient approach
both for reducing cancer risk and for modifying
the biological behavior of tumors. The World Cancer
Research Fund/American Institute of Cancer Research
has estimated that cancer is 30% to 40% preventable by
appropriate food and nutrition, regular physical activ-
ity, and avoidance of obesity.1 On a global scale, they
have estimated that yearly about 3 to 4 million cancer
cases might be prevented by adherence to their recom-
mendations.1

While optimizing the intake of speciﬁc foods and/or
their bioactive components seems to be a practical,
noninvasive, and cost-effective strategy for reducing
the cancer burden, this is far from simple.2 The com-
plexity of the problem is evident in the literally thou-
sands of dietary compounds consumed each day.2,3 For
example, it is estimated that humans consume more
than 5,000 individual ﬂavonoids, yet only a few have
been examined for their cancer protective effects.2

Nutritional Science Research Group, Division of Cancer Prevention,

National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD.

Address correspondence to Cindy D. Davis, PhD, Nutritional Science
Research Group, Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute, 6130 Executive Blvd, Suite 3159, Rockville, MD 20892-
7328. E-mail: davisci@mail.nih.gov

0270-9295/ - see front matter
Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1053/j.seminoncol.2010.05.001

Furthermore, the lack of quantitative information about
some known food constituents limits the ability to
decipher which are most important. Unfortunately,
since many bioactive food components remain largely
uncharacterized, confusion can arise about the true
role of a food as a determinant of health and disease
prevention. Interactions, both synergistic and antago-
nistic, between food components may explain why
isolated components do not always behave identically
to intact foods.4 Finally, the composition of the entire
diet (pattern) may inﬂuence the magnitude of the re-
sponse to a bioactive food component and ultimately
cancer.4

Predictive, validated and sensitive biomarkers, in-
cluding those that (1) evaluate “intake” (exposure) to a
speciﬁc food or bioactive component; (2) assess one or
more speciﬁc biological responses (effect); and (3)
predict individual “susceptibility” as a function of nu-
trient–nutrient interactions and genetics, are funda-
mental to evaluating who will beneﬁt most or be
placed at risk from dietary interventions. These biomar-
kers must be readily accessible, easily and reliably as-
sayed, and predictive of a key process(es) involved in
cancer.

In addition to identifying bioactive dietary compo-
nents, it is critical to deﬁne the amount of the speciﬁc
bioactive component that is needed to achieve concen-
trations in target tissues that will lead to a phenotypic
change. The response to a food is determined not only

Seminars in Oncology, Vol 37, No 3, June 2010, pp 243-257

243

