Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

www.elsevier.com/locate/mce

Functionally relevant polymorphisms in the human nuclear

vitamin D receptor gene

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld, Lenore S. Remus, Peter W. Jurutka, Heike Zitzer, Anish K. Oza,

Hope T.L. Dang, Carol A. Haussler, Michael A. Galligan, Michelle L. Thatcher,

Carlos Encinas Dominguez, Mark R. Haussler *

Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, 1501 N. Campbell A6e., Uni6ersity of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA

Abstract

The functional signiﬁcance of two unlinked human vitamin D receptor (hVDR) gene polymorphisms was evaluated in twenty
human ﬁbroblast cell lines. Genotypes at both a Fok I restriction site (F/f ) in exon II and a singlet (A) repeat in exon IX (L/S)
were determined, and relative transcription activities of endogenous hVDR proteins were measured using a transfected,
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-responsive reporter gene. Observed activities ranged from 2–100-fold induction by hormone, with
higher activity being displayed by the F and the L biallelic forms. Only when genotypes at both sites were considered
simultaneously did statistically signiﬁcant differences emerge. Moreover, the correlation between hVDR activity and genotype
segregated further into clearly deﬁned high and low activity groups with similar genotypic distributions. These results not only
demonstrate functional relevance for both the F/f and L/S common polymorphisms in hVDR, but also provide novel evidence
for a third genetic variable impacting receptor potency. © 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Vitamin D receptor; Gene polymorphisms; Pharmacogenomics

1. Introduction

The biological actions of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
[1,25(OH)2D3] are mediated largely, if not entirely, by
the vitamin D receptor (VDR), a member of the super-
family of nuclear hormone receptors (Whitﬁeld et al.,
1999). This protein is found in tissues known to play a
role in calcium homeostasis, and also in numerous
other tissues, where it appears to regulate a variety of
processes, including cell proliferation and differentia-
tion (Haussler et al., 1998). The signiﬁcance of the
nuclear VDR in calcium homeostasis, as well as in
certain differentiation and proliferation processes in
skin and uterus, has been conﬁrmed by gene knockout
studies in mice (Li et al., 1998; Kato et al., 1999).

A simpliﬁed diagram that illustrates how nuclear
hVDR mediates
transcriptional activation by the
1,25(OH)2D3 hormone is shown in Fig. 1A. The key
features of this model are: (i) liganding of nuclear VDR

* Corresponding author: Tel.: +1-520-6266033;

fax: +1-520-

6269015.

E-mail address: haussler@u.arizona.edu (M.R. Haussler).

by 1,25(OH)2D3; (ii) recruitment by 1,25(OH)2D3-VDR
of its retinoid X receptor (RXR) heteropartner that, in
turn, facilitates high-afﬁnity interaction of the dimeric
complex with vitamin D responsive elements (VDREs)
upstream of target genes; (iii) attraction by VDR of
basal transcription factor IIB (TFIIB), the rate-limiting
component of the transcription preinitiation complex;
and (iv) recruitment by the heterodimer of a number of
transcription coactivators, some with histone acetyl
transferase (HAT) activity to modify nucleosome/chro-
matin organization, such as SRC-1 (Gill et al., 1998),
and others like the DRIPs (Rachez et al., 1999) that
target the VDR supercomplex to the TATA-box/TBP
and RNA polymerase II transcription initiation ma-
chinery. The net result of this 1,25(OH)2D3-triggered
response is the regulation of genes coding for proteins
that carry out intestinal calcium absorption, bone re-
modeling, cell differentiation, etc. (Jurutka et al., 2001).
A modular diagram of the functional domains within
the hVDR protein is presented in Fig. 1B. The details
of the hVDR subdomain arrangement (see ﬁgure leg-
end) basically follow the general pattern for the sub-

0303-7207/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 3 0 3 - 7 2 0 7 ( 0 1 ) 0 0 4 0 6 - 3

146

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

family of nuclear receptors that heterodimerize with
RXR, such as the all-trans retinoic acid receptors (RARs)
and the thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) (Whitﬁeld et
al., 1999). For the purposes of the present communica-
tion, the most relevant regions of hVDR are the hor-
mone-binding domain, encoded by exons VI–IX of the
human gene (see also Fig. 2), the DNA binding domain/
zinc ﬁngers, encoded by exons II–IV, and a set of
discontinuous transactivation domains,
including re-
gions at the N-terminus (for TFIIB docking) (Jurutka et
al., 2000), and in helices 3 and 12 (for coactivator
recruitment). Since transactivation is the ultimate bio-
chemical action of the liganded VDR and depends on all
of the other capabilities of the receptor (ligand binding,
nuclear localization, heterodimerization and VDRE/
DNA binding), the present study focuses on this parame-
ter of receptor activity in order to probe for functional
signiﬁcance of hVDR gene polymorphisms.

The chromosomal gene for VDR has been cloned
(Miyamoto et al., 1997), and several common genetic
variants have been described in humans, most of which
are identiﬁed by a biallelic variation in a restriction
endonuclease site (Fig. 2). Genetic variation in the 3%
region of the hVDR gene is observed in speciﬁc intronic
sites for Bsm I (Morrison et al., 1992) and Apa I (Faraco
et al., 1989), a silent Taq I site in exon IX (Morrison et
al., 1992), as well as in a singlet(A) repeat in the portion
of exon IX encoding the 3% UTR (Ingles et al., 1997a) (see
Fig. 2, right). All of these variations near the 3% end of
the gene are in linkage disequilibrium (Morrison et al.,
1992; Verbeek et al., 1997), although this linkage is
weaker in some ethnic groups such as African-Americans
(Ingles et al., 1997a). Interestingly, none of these poly-
morphisms affect the structure of the VDR protein itself,
although the singlet(A) repeat in the 3% UTR is expressed
in the mature mRNA for hVDR. Singlet(A) variants are
classiﬁed according to length by the number of consec-
utive A’s in the repeat, with ]17 A’s scored as ‘long’
(L), and 515 A’s considered ‘short’ (S).

Another polymorphic site has been found in exon II
near the center of the hVDR gene (Saijo et al., 1991). This
site, which is genetically unlinked to the above Bsm/Apa/
Taq/singlet(A) cluster, is unique among common hVDR
variants described so far, in that it results in an alteration
of the hVDR protein structure (Fig. 2, bottom center).
Presence of the Fok I site (designated f ) predicts that a
427-residue VDR protein will be produced beginning at
Met-1 (M1 according to the numbering scheme of Baker
et al. (1988), whereas absence of this site (denoted F)
dictates translation from Met-4 (M4), producing a
protein of 424 amino acids (Arai et al., 1997).

In an initial report (Morrison et al., 1994), allelic
variation in the chromosomal gene for the vitamin D
receptor was proposed to represent a major part of the
genetic predisposition for low bone mineral density
(BMD), and perhaps for osteoporosis and/or skeletal

Fig. 1. (A) Model for transcriptional activation by 1,25(OH)2D3 as
mediated by a heterodimer of VDR and RXR bound to VDREs
upstream of target genes in vitamin-D responsive cells. As the pri-
mary receptor, VDR is activated by 1,25(OH)2D3 binding, but the
RXR coreceptor apparently can remain unliganded. The receptor
heterodimer associates with direct repeat-type responsive elements
upstream of the target genes and the liganded heterocomplex at-
tracts various coactivators, some with histone acetylase (HAT) ac-
tivity. VDR itself recruits basal transcription factor IIB (TFIIB).
Finally,
the ensemble of protein-protein-DNA interactions pro-
motes transcriptional initiation of a battery of target genes, leading
to the pleiotrophic effects of the 1,25(OH)2D3 hormone (Haussler
et al., 1998). (B) Schematic illustration of functional domains in the
VDR protein. The DNA binding domain, with two zinc ﬁnger
motifs,
is located near the N-terminus and also contains residues
that promote nuclear localization of the receptor. The central and
C-terminal region of the receptor contain subdomains that mediate
ligand binding (Rochel et al., 2000). The heterodimerization (with
RXR) and transactivation functions of hVDR appear to be medi-
ated by widely separated regions of the receptor. Heterodimeriza-
tion is supported by heptad repeats in the helix 7–10 region
(Nakajima et al., 1994), an E1 domain (Whitﬁeld et al., 1995), as
well as residues in the T-box and ﬁrst zinc ﬁnger (Hsieh et al.,
1995). Transactivation regions include: (i) the extreme N-terminus,
which possesses a TFIIB docking site (Jurutka et al., 2000); (ii) a
centrally located domain corresponding to helix 3 in the rat TRa,
hRARg and hVDR ligand binding domain crystals (Renaud et al.,
1995; Wagner et al., 1995; Kraichely et al., 1999; Rochel et al.,
2000); and (iii) the extreme C-terminus, corresponding to helix 12
in the rat TRa, hRARg and hVDR crystals (Renaud et al., 1995;
Wagner et al., 1995; Jurutka et al., 1997; Rochel et al., 2000). ‘A’
designates
important DNA-binding
amino acids (Hsieh et al., 1999). The residue 159–201 segment,
which is unconserved in VDRs, is encoded by a novel exon (V),
not seen in other nuclear receptors for which the gene structure is
known (Haussler et al., 1998).

the A-box, which contains

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

147

Fig. 2. The human VDR gene, with key features relevant to polymorphic variation in VDR expression and activity. The ﬁfteen known exons are
depicted at the top (Miyamoto et al., 1997; Crofts et al., 1998). The 5% untranslated region of hVDR mRNAs is observed to be alternatively spliced
in all tested human tissues (Crofts et al., 1998). The predominant hVDR mRNA in tissues tested to date contains a 5% UTR consisting of exon
IA spliced to IC; several other less abundant spliced forms have been described, implying the existence of at least three promoters for the hVDR
gene, depicted by arrows above exons IF, IA and ID, respectively, (Crofts et al., 1998). Exons II and III encode the translation start site, a short
N-terminal domain, and the two zinc ﬁnger motifs of the DNA binding domain (one in each exon). The overlapping ligand-binding and strong
heterodimerization domains are encoded by exons VI–IX, with exon IX also containing the entire 3% UTR. At right are shown four linked
polymorphic sites in or somewhat 5% to exon IX. The present study focuses on the singlet(A) repeat, which lies about 1 kb upstream of the
polyadenylation site and exists in either a long (L=17–24 A’s) or a short (S=10–15 A’s) form (Ingles et al., 1997a). An additional site of interest
to the current study is the dimorphic translational start site (Saijo et al., 1991), the two forms of which (F or f, illustrated at bottom center) are
unlinked to the L/S variants (Gross et al., 1996).

fractures, although these associations have been dis-
puted by other studies [reviewed in (Wood and Fleet,
1998)]. More recently, correlations have been reported
between VDR allelic variants and risk of prostate can-
cer (Ingles et al., 1997b; Watanabe et al., 1999), breast
cancer (Ingles et al., 1997c; Ruggiero et al., 1998;
Curran et al., 1999), sporadic primary hyperparathy-
roidism (Correa et al., 1999), and sarcoidosis (Niimi et
al., 1999). However, conﬂicting reports have appeared
that minimize or even contradict these associations
(Cheng and Tsai, 1999; Correa et al., 1999). Likewise,
direct testing of hVDR alleles for activity has yielded
somewhat variable results, although, when a difference
is found, the b and F hVDR alleles appear to be more
active than the B or f alleles (see Section 4).

One caveat in most of the above-cited studies is that
correlations were sought between a single, speciﬁc poly-
morphism, or between the Bsm-Apa-Taq linkage group,
and the physiological parameter of interest. Very few
studies have attempted to control for hVDR genotype
at both the Bsm/Apa/Taq/singlet(A) cluster and the
Fok I site. In one example (Ferrari et al., 1998), a
correlation between Fok I alleles and BMD could not
be demonstrated, but ‘cross-genotyping’ with Bsm I
alleles revealed a potentially important positive associa-
tion in prepubertal girls between the ffBB hVDR geno-
type and low BMD (Ferrari et al., 1998).

Another caveat in the above cited studies is that a
direct inﬂuence of allelic variation on VDR expression
or activity was not demonstrated,
leaving open the
possibility that the observed correlation might be due

to linkage to another nearby site or even to a different
gene. In the only two extant studies in which the
potential relationship between genotype and activity of
the hVDR protein was evaluated (Verbeek et al., 1997;
Gross et al., 1998), no functional inﬂuence of speciﬁc
alleles was observed, but again, only a single polymor-
phic site was examined in isolation.

In the present communication, we report an evalua-
tion of a panel of twenty human ﬁbroblast lines. The
current protocol includes simultaneous consideration of
the hVDR genotypes at both the singlet(A) and the Fok
I loci, which are then correlated with activity of the
endogenous VDR in the corresponding cell line. From
these data, we conclude that (a) biallelic variants at the
Fok I and the singlet(A) sites, in combination, affect
transcriptional activation by the endogenous hVDR in
the tested human ﬁbroblasts; (b) the singlet(A) L allele
is more active than the S allele; and (c) a third, un-
known genetic variable appears to inﬂuence VDR
activity.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Plasmid DNAs used for transfection and in 6itro
transcription

The

reporter

1,25(OH)2D3-responsive

plasmid,
(CT4)4TKGH, contains four copies of the rat osteocal-
cin VDRE (Terpening et al., 1991) linked upstream of
the thymidine kinase promoter-GH reporter gene

148

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

(Nichols Institute, San Juan Capistrano, CA). The
hVDR expression vector, pSG5-hVDR, expressing the
F/M4 isoform of hVDR, has been described earlier
(Hsieh et al., 1991). This construct was adapted for
expression of the f/M1 hVDR isoform by inserting the
appropriate DNA codons via in vitro site-directed mu-
tagenesis (Jurutka et al., 2000). For monitoring the
efﬁciency of transfection, a commercial plasmid ex-
pressing b-galactosidase (CMV-bgal) was obtained
from Promega Corp. (Madison, WI).

2.2. Cell lines

Cell lines DNF-BJ, DWF-CV and DWF-TW were
provided courtesy of C. Bloch at the Children’s Hospi-
tal, Denver, CO. Patients DWF-CV and DWF-TW are
reported to have features of William’s Syndrome. Other
cell lines were obtained from the American Type Cul-
ture Collection, Manassas, VA, with patients Ber Lin,
Be Sal and Ran Nor reported to have late-onset
osteoporosis.

2.3. Transfection of cultured cells and transcriptional
acti6ation assay

cell

lines were

Human ﬁbroblast

cultured in
DMEM:Ham’s F12 medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100
mg/ml streptomycin. Cells were transfected by electro-
poration (see Fig. 3, top left). Brieﬂy, cells were col-
lected by trypsinization, pelleted at
low speed and

resuspended at 5×106 cells per ml in 1X HeBS buffer
(20 mM HEPES, pH 7.1, 137 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl,
0.7 mM Na2HPO4, 6 mM dextrose). Suspended cells
(0.8 ml) were then combined with 40 mg (CT4)4 TKGH
reporter plasmid, 10 mg of CMV-bgal plasmid, and 450
mg carrier DNA (pTZ18U plasmid), and adjusted to a
total volume of 1 ml in 1X HeBS buffer in a 0.4 cm
electrode gap electroporation cuvette. Each cuvette was
then subjected to electroporation in a Bio-Rad Gene
Pulser II apparatus (with capacitance extender attach-
ment) at settings of 200 V and 950 mF. After 10 min of
incubation at room temperature,
the electroporated
cells were suspended in culture medium and then di-
vided into six 60 mm culture dishes and incubated at
37°C for 72 h in the presence of 10− 8 M 1,25(OH)2D3
(three plates) or ethanol vehicle (also in triplicate
plates). The levels of growth hormone secreted into the
culture medium were
then assessed by radioim-
munoassay using a commercial kit (Nichols Institute)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. To normalize
results for the efﬁciency of transfection in each plate,
b-galactosidase levels were assayed in cell
lysates
(freeze-thaw method) using reagents and instructions
from a commercial kit (Promega Corp.). These steps
are represented as a ﬂow chart in Fig. 3 (left).

For the experiment depicted in Fig. 7, ROS 2/3 cells
(8×105 cells per 60 mm dish) were transfected by
calcium phosphate coprecipitation as described earlier
(Jurutka et al., 2000) using 10 mg of a reporter plasmid
containing 1100 bp of the natural rat osteocalcin pro-
moter linked to the human growth hormone gene [de-

Fig. 3. Protocol for VDR genotype/phenotype analysis of human ﬁbroblast cell lines. Cultured cells (top center) were transfected, incubated and
assayed for relative transcriptional activity as depicted schematically at the left and detailed in Section 2. Results were expressed as fold-induction
by 1,25(OH)2D3. Cells of each line were also harvested for genomic DNA isolation and genotyping by PCR as shown at the upper right. For
determination of singlet(A) repeat length, multiple PCR products from exon IX of each line were sequenced individually (see sample gel at far
right). PCR products of exon II were digested with the Fok I restriction enzyme and resolved by electrophoresis (see sample gel at center-right).
Final results for each cell line thus included the genotype at both the 3% UTR singlet(A) site (L/S), and the translation initiation site (F/f ), along
with relative transactivation activity of the endogenous VDR (see sample summary graph at bottom center).

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

149

noted BGP-TKGH (Terpening et al., 1991)], along with
1.0 mg of pSG5-hVDR expressing either F/M4 or f/M1
hVDR. Sixteen hours post-transfection, the cells were
washed, and refed (DMEM:Ham’s F-12 medium sup-
plemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100
mg/ml
streptomycin) and treated with 10− 8 M
1,25(OH)2D3 or ethanol vehicle. After 24 h, the level of
secreted growth hormone was assayed in the culture
medium from each plate as described above.

2.4. Genotyping of human ﬁbroblasts

DNA was prepared from cultured human ﬁbroblasts
(107 cells) using the QIAmp tissue kit (Qiagen Inc.,
Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. For F/f genotyping, isolated genomic DNA (500
ng) was combined with 100 ng each of primers 2a and
2b (Gross et al., 1996), along with 5 ml of 10X buffer
(Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT) plus 1.5 mM MgCl2, 2.5
mM each of dATP, dCTP, dTTP and dGTP, and 0.25
ml Taq DNA polymerase (Roche Molecular Biochemi-
cals, Indianapolis, IN). PCR conditions were: 20 cycles
at 94°C for 30 s, 74°C for 30 s (with −0.1°C per cycle)
and 72°C for 60 s. This was followed by 25 cycles at
94°C for 30 s, 63°C for 30 s and 72°C for 60 s.
Approximately, 200 ng of unpuriﬁed PCR product was
then incubated with 1 ml Fok I enzyme (New England
Biolabs, Beverly, MA) and 1 ml 10X buffer in a total
volume of 10 ml for 1.5 h at 37°C. The digestion
mixture was electrophoresed on a 4% NuSieve (3:1)
Agarose gel in TBE buffer (90 mM Tris–borate, pH8,
2 mM EDTA) to determine whether the PCR product
was completely digested (indicating the ff genotype),
partially digested (Ff ) or completely undigested (FF).
For L/S genotyping, isolated genomic DNA (500 ng)
was combined with 5% and 3% primers (100 ng each)
(Ingles et al., 1997b) using the same PCR proﬁle de-
scribed above. PCR products at approximately 400–
425 bp were resolved on 0.8% Agarose gels, excised
from the gel and isolated into 20 ml of Tris–HCl, pH
8.5, using a QIAEX II extraction kit (Qiagen Inc.)
according to the protocol of the manufacturer. The
isolated PCR products (7.5 ml) were then cloned into
the T-vector and transformed into the XL-1 Blue strain
of E. coli using a T-vector kit (Promega Corp.). Plas-
mid DNA was isolated from transformed bacteria by
standard methods and sequenced (‘A’ reaction only)
using a T7 Sequenase kit (Amersham Pharmacia Bio-
tech, Piscataway, NJ). Typical results are depicted in
Fig. 3 (right).

2.5. GST coprecipitation assays

The ability of either F/M4 or f/M1 hVDRs to inter-
act with human TFIIB was assessed as described earlier
(Jurutka et al., 2000). Brieﬂy, TFIIB-glutathione-S-

transferase (GST) fusion protein was expressed from
pGEX-2T-hTFIIB (Baniahmad et al., 1993) and GST
alone was expressed from pGEX-4T, both in E. coli
strain DH5a. Each protein was then coupled to glu-
tathione Sepharose. For the GST ‘pull-down’ assays,
pSG5-hVDR vectors expressing either F/M4 or f/M1
hVDRs were used to generate [35S] methionine-labeled
proteins utilizing the TNT Coupled Reticulocyte Lysate
kit (Promega Corp.). The desired 35S-labeled protein
was then incubated with the beads in the absence or
presence of 1,25(OH)2D3 (10 − 6 M). Next, the unbound
proteins were washed from the beads with 4×1 ml
wash buffer [0.15 M KCl, 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 1
mM EDTA, 0.3 mM ZnCl2, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1%
Tween-20, 1 mg/ml BSA, and the following protease
inhibitors, obtained from Roche Molecular Biochemi-
cals (Indianapolis, IN): 0.5 mg/ml Pefabloc SC, 15
mg/ml aprotinin, 1 mg/ml pepstatin A, 1 mg/ml
leu-
peptin]. The bound proteins were extracted from the
beads into 40 ml loading buffer (2% SDS, 5% b-mercap-
toethanol, 125 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, and 20% glyc-
erol), boiled for 3 min, separated by SDS-PAGE and
visualized via autoradiography.

3. Results

3.1. Genotyping of human ﬁbroblast lines

As described in Section 2 and depicted schematically
in Fig. 3, genomic DNA samples were extracted from
twenty human ﬁbroblast cell lines, subjected to PCR
using two independent sets of primers, and analyzed for
their hVDR genotype at the polymorphic sites in exon
II (F/f ) and exon IX (L/S). F/f genotypes were deter-
mined by digestion of the PCR products from each line
with the restriction enzyme Fok I (Gross et al., 1996).
Two independent PCR reactions were performed for
each line, and digestion experiments included a ff and
Ff line as positive controls to monitor activity of the
Fok I restriction endonuclease. A typical digestion pat-
tern is shown at the center-right of Fig. 3, displaying
the undigested PCR product (265 bp), partially digested
DNA from a heterozygote, and completely digested
DNA (69 and 196 bp fragments) from an ff subject.
The frequencies of the F and f alleles in the present
sample group were 62.5 and 37.5%, respectively. This
distribution of hVDR alleles is similar to that charac-
terized for Caucasian populations in other studies
(Gross et al., 1996; Eccleshall et al., 1998; Gennari et
al., 1999).

L/S genotypes were determined by sequencing of
PCR products to ascertain the exact length of the
singlet(A) repeat (Ingles et al., 1997b). As reported by
others (Ingles et al., 1997a), we observed (Fig. 4) multi-
ple alleles at this locus which segregate into a ‘long’ (L)

150

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

tion with a 1,25(OH)2D3-responsive reporter plasmid
and incubation in the presence or absence of 10− 8 M
1,25(OH)2D3, expressed as fold-induction by the hor-
mone. The assay conditions,
including quantitative
monitoring of transfection efﬁciency using a b-galac-
tosidase vector, were designed to permit comparison of
endogenous VDR activity between cell lines. The data
(Fig. 5) reveal a striking spectrum of activities, ranging
from only a 1.75-fold induction of the growth hormone
reporter within the 72-h treatment period to a 100-fold
effect of hormone, with a mean of 28924 (S.D.) fold
induction. The lowest activity (1.75-fold induction by
1,25(OH)2D3) was observed in a ﬁbroblast line derived
from a 5-week-old embryo. As denoted in Fig. 5, a
subset of the tested ﬁbroblast cell lines are from pa-
tients with either osteoporosis (*), in which subjects are
usually normocalcemic, but can have low blood cal-
cium, or with William’s Syndrome (§), a condition
frequently presenting with hypercalcemia. Interestingly,
one of the William’s patients (DWF-CV) contains en-
dogenous VDR with the highest activity (100-fold in-
duction by 1,25(OH)2D3), while the other patient
displays
by
1,25(OH)2D3. Conversely, one of the osteoporosis pa-
tients (Ran Nor) yielded a very low VDR activity in the
assay (6-fold induction), while the two other os-
teoporotic individuals (Be Sal, Ber Lin) displayed in-
ductions by hormone that were only slightly below
average (18- and 22-fold, respectively). No other associ-
ations were noted between patient status (e.g., age, sex
or medical condition) and VDR activity (see Section 4).

near-average

a

(23-fold)

induction

3.3. Correlations between either Fok I or L/S genotype
and acti6ity of endogenous VDR

Given the current interest in the Fok I and L/S
hVDR polymorphisms, correlations were next sought
between the genotypes of each cell line at these two loci
and the relative activities of the corresponding endoge-
nous VDRs. Accordingly, all twenty cell lines examined
were grouped into ff (4 lines), Ff (7 lines) or FF (9
lines). The average fold-inductions by 1,25(OH)2D3 for
each group are displayed (9S.E.M.) in Fig. 6A. Al-
though no clear trend is evident, it is notable that the
FF group displays the highest average fold-induction by
the hormonal ligand. These F/f groupings were then
subdivided into sets with the LS genotype (Fig. 6C, left
panel) and the LL genotype (Fig. 6C, right panel),
thereby controlling for the L/S genotype when evaluat-
ing the activity of endogenous F/f hVDR. Again, in
both groups of data, the FF cells display the highest
activity. However, none of
the differences between
groupings in either Fig. 6A or 6C achieve statistical
signiﬁcance (at
the 95% conﬁdence interval), pre-
sumably because of the small number of cell lines in
each grouping or the possible existence of a novel

Fig. 4. Compilation of sequencing results from L/S genotyping
(approximately 4–5 sequences per cell line). Variations of 1–2 A’s
were observed in separate sequencing reactions from the same cell
line, presumably because of errors in PCR (Ingles et al., 1997a) or in
the bacterial replication of these repeated sequences. Allele frequen-
cies in the present sample of 20 cell lines were 40% S and 60% L,
nearly identical to published results of 41% S for Caucasians living in
the USA (Ingles et al., 1997a).

group with 17–24 A’s in the repeat, and a ‘short’ group
(S) with 10–15 A’s in the repeat. The frequencies of the
L and S hVDR alleles in the present panel of cell lines
were 60 and 40%, respectively, similar to that earlier
published for Caucasian populations (Ingles et al.,
1997a).

3.2. Relati6e VDR transcriptional acti6ities of human
ﬁbroblast cell lines

Fig. 5 shows the hVDR-mediated transcription re-
sults from 20 human ﬁbroblast cell lines after transfec-

Fig. 5. Relative transcriptional activity of endogenous VDR in 20
human ﬁbroblast lines. Results from all cell lines (average of ]6
experiments, each in triplicate (9S.E.M.) are arranged in order of
increasing fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3. Cell lines DWF-TW and
DWF-CV (§) were obtained from patients with features of William’s
Syndrome, and patients Ran Nor, Be Sal and Ber Lin (*) had
late-onset osteoporosis. All other lines were taken from patients with
no known disorders of bone or calcium metabolism. Genotypes of
each line are given at the top.

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

151

3.4. The F hVDR isoform is more acti6e in transfected
cells

Although the above F/f groupings did not show a
rigorous association between hVDR genotype and fold-
induction by 1,25(OH)2D3 (Fig. 6A and C), recent
results from other laboratories (Arai et al., 1997; Colin
et al., 2000) have demonstrated an apparent higher
activity for the F isoform of hVDR relative to the f
isoform. The results presented in Fig. 6 are generally
consistent with this conclusion. In addition, Fig. 7A
depicts an in vitro experiment in which the F and f
hVDR isoforms were expressed from a pSG5-hVDR
construct and directly tested for transcriptional activity.
The original pSG5-hVDR vector expresses the F/M4
isoform; a cDNA insert expressing the f/M1 was engi-
neered into this same vector via site-directed mutagene-
sis [see Section 2 and (Jurutka et al., 2000)]. These two
vectors were separately transfected into the VDR-deﬁ-
cient rat osteosarcoma line, ROS 2/3, along with the
BGP-TKGH reporter plasmid. The results of this anal-
ysis (Fig. 7A) show a signiﬁcant (PB0.001) difference
in fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3, with the F hVDR
construct displaying a greater response to 1,25(OH)2D3
(4.2-fold) than the f allele construct (2.6-fold).

Fig. 7. Relative activities of F/M4 hVDR and f/M1 hVDR, expressed
from an engineered construct. (A) An f/M1 hVDR cDNA, differing
at the translational start site, was created from an existing F/M4
cDNA by site-directed mutagenesis. Both cDNAs, cloned in the
vector pSG5, were used to express F/M4 and f/M1 hVDRs in
VDR-deﬁcient ROS 2/3 cells (Jurutka et al., 2000). Assays for relative
transcriptional activity were performed as described above for en-
dogenous VDR in human ﬁbroblast cell lines, except that the BGP-
TKGH reporter vector was used (see Section 2). The results shown
(triplicate assays9S.E.M.) are representative of at least three inde-
pendent experiments. (B) Using the same cDNAs as in (A), 35S-la-
beled F/M4 and f/M1 hVDRs were expressed in a coupled in vitro
transcription/translation system (see Section 2) and assayed for their
ability to bind a human TFIIB-glutathione S-transferase fusion
protein that had been immobilized on Sepharose beads (Jurutka et
al., 2000). Washed beads were denatured and subjected to elec-
trophoresis on 5–15% SDS-PAGE gels (see Section 2), and 35S-la-
beled protein bands were visualized by autoradiography (left panel of
B). The right panel of B displays autoradiograms of 35S-labeled
proteins used for the pull-down assays (5% of total input).

Fig. 6. Correlation of transcriptional activity with hVDR genotype.
(A) All 20 cells lines are grouped by F/f genotype. Each grouping
consists of the indicated number of lines, and the fold-induction
values for these lines (taken from Fig. 5) are represented as the
average9S.E.M. (B) As in (A), but all 20 cell lines are grouped by
L/S genotype. (C; left panel) The ten cell lines with genotype LS are
grouped by F/f genotype, and the average fold-induction by
9S.E.M. is shown. (C; right panel) The seven lines with
1,25(OH)2D3
an LL genotype are similarly grouped by F/f genotype and plotted.
The three SS hVDR cell lines are omitted from this analysis, since
they do not form a complete set of F/f groupings ( ffSS is missing).
(D; left panel) The seven cell lines with genotype Ff are grouped by
L/S genotype. (D; right panel) The nine lines with a FF genotype are
similarly grouped by L/S genotype and plotted. The four ff cell lines
are omitted, as they do not form a complete set of L/S groupings
(again, ffSS is missing).

genetic variable in hVDR activity. Nevertheless, the FF
groupings show higher fold-inductions than the corre-
sponding Ff groups, with the exception of lines with the
SS hVDR genotype (see Fig. 6D), appearing to conﬁrm
an effect of the F/f polymorphism and suggesting that
the F allele is more active.

When 1,25(OH)2D3-stimulated transcription activities
in the twenty lines are grouped by L/S genotype (Fig.
6B), a much clearer, but still not statistically signiﬁcant,
trend emerges, with SS having the lowest fold-induc-
tion, LL possessing the highest, and the LS genotype
exhibiting intermediate activity. This trend persists
when the groupings are subdivided into those with
constant Ff or FF genotypic backgrounds (Fig. 6D),
leading to the tentative conclusion that the L hVDR
allele is more active than the S allele. The SS and ff
subsets were not included in Fig. 6C and Fig. 6D,
because of the low number of samples of both SS and
ff homozygotes (3 and 4, respectively), as well as the
complete lack of the ffSS hVDR genotype in the cur-
rent series of ﬁbroblasts lines.

152

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

3.5. Relati6e ability of F/f hVDR isoforms to interact
with TFIIB, in 6itro

It has earlier been reported by our group (Jurutka et
al., 2000) that F hVDR interacts more efﬁciently with
TFIIB than does the f hVDR isoform, thus providing a
plausible mechanism for the greater transactivation po-
tency of the F hVDR. Fig. 7B illustrates a typical
experiment, utilizing the GST pull-down technique to
compare the abilities of in vitro-synthesized, 35S-labeled
F/M4 and f/M1 hVDR isoreceptors to interact with an
immobilized TFIIB fusion protein. Even in the face of
a higher input of 35S-labeled f/M1 protein, the F/M4
protein shows a reproducibly greater (approximately
2-fold) ability to interact with TFIIB, when compared
with the f/M1 protein under the same conditions (Ju-
rutka et al., 2000). Whether this difference in activity
reﬂects that occurring under in vivo conditions is not
known; however, these results provide a reasonable
mechanism by which to explain the enhanced transacti-
vation ability of the F/M4 hVDR isoform, in vitro, and
are consistent with a proposed bioactivity for F hVDR
that is also greater than that of f hVDR, in vivo [(Gross
et al., 1996; Arai et al., 1997; Harris et al., 1997; Tao et
al., 1998; Videman et al., 1998; Correa et al., 1999;
Ferrari et al., 1999; Gennari et al., 1999; Kurabayashi
et al., 1999; Lucotte et al., 1999; Colin et al., 2000; Sosa
et al., 2000), see Section 4].

each increasing increment in allele score yielding a
higher average fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3. A quali-
tatively similar trend was seen if 1,25(OH)2D3-stimu-
lated values for reporter gene production were plotted
instead of
fold-induction values (data not shown).
Thus, the dramatic escalation of hVDR functional ac-
tivity appears to correlate to the combined hVDR
genotypic allele score at the F/f and L/S loci. Impor-
tantly, the difference between the two groups with allele
scores of 2 and 4 achieves statistical signiﬁcance by the
two-tailed Student’s t-test (P=0.035).

Fig. 8B depicts the identical data set analyzed in A,
but with each cell line plotted as an individual point.
When a linear regression line is calculated for all 20
lines, the allele score shows a moderately strong, and
statistically signiﬁcant, positive correlation with trans-
activation (correlation coefﬁcient=0.595; P=0.012).
If, however, the cell lines are divided into a high group
(above the n=20 regression line) and low group (below
the n=20 line), the respective correlation coefﬁcients
are markedly improved, to 0.958 for the high group
(n=8, P B0.001) and 0.858 for the low group (n=12,
PB0.001). This apparent segregation of values into
high and low groups argues for the existence of a new,
third variable, other than the Fok I or 3% cluster of
polymorphisms containing L/S, in determining hVDR
functional activity.

3.6. Correlation between genotype at both polymorphic
loci and transacti6ation by endogenous VDRs

4. Discussion

Considering the lack of genetic linkage between the
Fok I and L/S polymorphisms (Gross et al., 1996;
Ferrari et al., 1998; Cheng and Tsai, 1999), plus the fact
that both loci appear to affect function of the endoge-
nous receptor,
in vivo (Fig. 6), as well as evidence
indicating that F hVDR is more active than f, in vitro,
we attempted next to correlate the combined genotypes
at both loci with hVDR transactivation ability. In order
to condense genotypic information from both sites into
a single variable, an ‘allele score’ was devised based on
which allelic variants appear more active in the litera-
ture and in the present experiments. Since the F geno-
type is more active than f both in vivo and in vitro,
each F hVDR allele was assigned a value of 1, while f
alleles were scored as zero. Likewise, because the data
in Fig. 6, panels B and D, indicate the L hVDR alleles
to be more active than the S alleles, L and S alleles
received scores of 1 and 0, respectively. Since the hVDR
gene resides on an autosome (chromosome 12) (Szpirer
et al., 1991), possible total allele scores range from 0 to
4 for both sexes. After grouping all twenty cell lines
according to this formula, the average fold-induction
by 1,25(OH)2D3 was plotted versus the allele score (Fig.
8A). A striking trend emerges from this analysis, with

A goal of the present study was to examine endoge-
nous hVDR transcriptional activity in relation to
hVDR genotype at unlinked polymorphic sites in both
exons II and IX. The results reveal a strong correlation
between genotype and VDR activity that emerges when
both polymorphic sites are simultaneously considered
(Fig. 8). A corollary of this conclusion is that variation
at both polymorphic sites is important to hVDR func-
tional activity, in vivo, but that considering each site
separately may not reveal signiﬁcant effects. Thus, the
current data may explain why many attempts to corre-
late hVDR activity with genotype at a single locus have
been unsuccessful.

The allelic distributions found in the present sample
are similar to genotype frequencies in the published
literature. The 62.5% frequency reported here for the F
allele is comparable to the 63.5% published for Italian
women (Gennari et al., 1999), the 62% for French
women (Eccleshall et al., 1998) and the 61% for Mexi-
can-American Caucasian women (Gross et al., 1996),
but lower than the incidences of the F allele (68.5%)
observed for Japanese women (Arai et al., 1997), or the
80.5% reported for African-American women (Harris et
al., 1997). Concerning the singlet(A) L/S alleles, the
frequency of the L allele in the present sample, 60%,

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

153

Fig. 8. Correlation of transcriptional activity with hVDR genotype at both L/S and F/f loci. (A) Results from Fig. 5 were grouped according to
an ‘allele score’, computed as the sum of F and L alleles in each cell line. As indicated earlier, no cell lines with the ffSS hVDR genotype are
included in the cell lines studied; hence, no cell line with a score of zero could be evaluated. The average of the group with a score of two is
signiﬁcantly different from the average of the group with a score of 4 (P=0.035) as assessed by the two-tailed Student’s t-test. (B) The data from
(A) were plotted as individual points instead of the average of each group, with each point representing a single cell line. The linear regression
ﬁt for all 20 points is represented by a dotted line. The regression line for an apparent ‘high’ group (	, n=8) is shown as a dashed line, while
the remaining lines appear to form a ‘low’ group (, n=12), with its regression ﬁt illustrated as a solid line.

again resembles published results for Caucasians (59%),
but is less than that noted for Hispanics (69%), African-
Americans (71%), Japanese-Americans (91%), and Chi-
nese (91%) (Ingles et al., 1997a).

The assignment of F as the more active hVDR allele
is based not only on the current analysis of ﬁbroblast
lines, but also on in vitro data collected with F and f
proteins expressed in transfected cells [Fig. 7 and (Arai
et al., 1997; Jurutka et al., 2000)]. Another group (Colin
et al., 2000) has also studied F versus f hVDR proteins,
and reported a lower ED50 for 1,25(OH)2D3 with the F
allele. These data indicating a more active F hVDR
allele are consistent with a number of epidemiological
studies which suggest that the F allele, when compared
with the f allele,
is associated with increased BMD
(Gross et al., 1996; Arai et al., 1997; Harris et al., 1997;
Tao et al., 1998; Ferrari et al., 1999; Lucotte et al.,
1999), higher rates of bone turnover (Kurabayashi et
al., 1999), lower risk for primary hyperparathyroidism
(Correa et al., 1999; Sosa et al., 2000), lower risk for
intervertebral disc degeneration (Videman et al., 1998)
and lower incidence of vertebral fracture (Gennari et
al., 1999). However, it should be acknowledged that not
all studies have found these associations. For instance,
one group (Eccleshall et al., 1998) did not observe a
correlation between hVDR genotype and BMD in a
large cohort of French women. Also, another group
(Gross et al., 1998) was unable to correlate any hVDR-
related functional parameter with F/f genotype in either
cells transfected with vectors expressing F versus f
hVDRs, or in a small panel of human ﬁbroblast lines,
although perhaps because of methodological
limita-

tions, small differences in activity may have escaped
detection. Additionally, as discussed above, the fact
that only the F/f genotype was considered in the above
investigations implies that the L/S genotype could have
been a signiﬁcant confounder in these studies.

The assignment of L hVDR as more active than S is
based exclusively on observations with the present
panel of ﬁbroblast cell lines. L and S hVDR alleles do
not produce different proteins, and, therefore, cannot
be tested in the same fashion as F/f isoforms. As a
provocative test of this assignment, we instead enter-
tained the alternative hypothesis that S hVDR alleles
are more active, and replotted the data in Fig. 8A.
However, the plot of this modiﬁed allele score (F+S)
versus transcriptional activity appeared to show an
inverse correlation between hVDR allele score and
bioactivity (data not shown). This exercise, plus the
present data (Fig. 6 and Fig. 8), strongly support the
premise that L is the more active hVDR allele. Since
this polymorphism occurs in exon IX, but is expressed
only in the 3% UTR of hVDR mRNA, the working
hypothesis presented herein states that the L allele may
produce receptor mRNA that is more stable and/or is
translated more efﬁciently into hVDR protein than the
S allele.

Pertinent to the hypothesis above, the mRNA stabil-
ities of allelic variants in or adjacent to exon IX [i.e.,
considering one or more sites in the Bsm/Taq/Apa/sin-
glet(A) cluster] have been evaluated in recent studies
using various
(Morrison et al., 1994;
Mocharla et al., 1997; Verbeek et al., 1997; Carling et
al., 1998; Gross et al., 1998; Durrin et al., 1999).

strategies

154

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

investigations,

Mirroring the epidemiological
these
studies have yielded conﬂicting results. In one set of
experiments (Verbeek et al., 1997),
lymphocytes het-
erozygous for the Taq polymorphism were examined. It
was found that, whereas mRNA stabilities were similar
for both alleles, the mRNA from the t allele (linked to
S) was consistently 30% less abundant. This result was
interpreted as suggesting a possible difference in tran-
scriptional regulation between the two allelic forms
studied, although no mechanism for this effect was
proposed (Verbeek et al., 1997). In contrast, another
study (Carling et al., 1998) examining pituitary ade-
nomas from 42 patients showed that B and t alleles
were associated with higher hVDR mRNA levels,
reaching statistical signiﬁcance when homozygous BB
or tt lines were compared with bb or TT homozygotes.
Results similar to those of Carling et al. were obtained
by others (Morrison et al., 1994), using a heterologous
system in which 3.2 kb of 3% UTR from two subjects
homozygous for either BAtS or baTL were linked to a
luciferase reporter gene. In transfected COS-7 cells, the
BAtS construct displayed higher luciferase activity, sug-
gesting to these authors that either transcriptional ac-
tivity of the construct itself, or mRNA stability of its
transcript, were more favorably affected by attachment
of the BAtS as opposed to the baTL 3% UTR (Morrison
et al., 1994). Finally, three further groups reported no
signiﬁcant effect of 3% UTR allelic variants on hVDR
mRNA. These studies examined B versus b mRNA
abundance in blood monocytes (Mocharla et al., 1997),
B versus b hVDR protein and mRNA abundance in
cultured skin ﬁbroblasts (Gross et al., 1998), and stabil-
ity of globin mRNAs attached to L or S 3% UTRs in
transfected NIH3T3 cells (Durrin et al., 1999). In par-
ticular, the last study, in which methodology similar to
that of Morrison et al. was used, strongly suggests that
the baTL and BAtS 3% UTRs do not confer different
mRNA stabilities, at least when attached to a het-
erologous (rabbit b globin) mRNA (Durrin et al.,
1999).

Drawing conclusions from the above investigations
with respect to the L/S polymorphism must be done
cautiously, since only two of the six studies cited above
(Morrison et al., 1994; Durrin et al., 1999) actually
determined L/S genotype in their subjects. Neverthe-
less, given the reasonably tight linkage between Bsm I
and singlet(A) polymorphisms (Ingles et al., 1997a), the
above discussed results, when taken together, do sug-
gest that mRNA stability may not be a major mecha-
nism distinguishing the activity of L versus S alleles.
The possibility remains, however, that the L allele in
some fashion produces more VDR protein from a given
unit of mRNA. While there is a paucity of data to
support or refute such a conclusion, it is notable that
ligand binding assays (Gross et al., 1998) seem to
indicate a trend toward higher VDR abundance (ex-

not

these

differences were

pressed as Nmax) in bb versus BB ﬁbroblast lines, al-
though
statistically
signiﬁcant. Should it be the case that L alleles (linked to
b) produce more hVDR protein, what could be the
mechanism for such an effect? Recent observations
regarding mammalian and yeast poly(A) binding
proteins (PABPs) indicate that binding of PABP to
mRNA enhances translatability of mRNAs via an in-
teraction with other proteins that interact with the 5%
end of the message (Munroe and Jacobson, 1990; Le et
al., 1997). Usually, multiple PABP monomers bind to
poly(A)+ RNAs, with each monomer occupying ap-
proximately 27 adenylate residues (Baer and Kornberg,
1980). Intriguingly, further studies with human PABP
suggest that as few as 11 consecutive A’s can bind to
PABP, with 25 A’s giving maximum afﬁnity (Deo et al.,
1999). Thus, one could speculate that: (a) PABP may be
capable of binding to the singlet(A) repeat in the hVDR
gene; and (b) its ability to bind may be enhanced in
long (L) alleles (17–24 A’s) versus short (S) alleles
(10–15 A’s). Greater association of PABP with L alle-
les would then lead to more efﬁcacious translation via a
more potent interaction with translation factors such as
EF-4B (Le et al., 1997).

a

using

1,25(OH)2D3-responsive

Regardless of the potential mechanism, the endoge-
nous VDR activities, as measured in the present experi-
ments
reporter
plasmid, showed a surprising range of activities, from
1.75- to 100-fold induction by 1,25(OH)2D3 It is as-
serted that the current results are valid when comparing
cell lines within the studied group, particularly because
the data were normalized for transfection efﬁciency as
monitored by inclusion of an expression plasmid for
b-galactosidase. It is possible, nonetheless, that the
presence of four closely-spaced vitamin D responsive
elements in the (CT4)4TKGH reporter construct used
could exaggerate small differences in activity that may
be much more subtle under in vivo conditions, espe-
cially considering that natural promoters often possess
a single, or at most, two vitamin D responsive elements
(Haussler et al., 1998). Indeed, the results with the
BGP-TKGH, which contains a single VDRE element,
revealed more modest transactivation levels in trans-
fected cells (see Fig. 7A) and a less dramatic difference
between F versus f hVDR activity.

The absence in the current sample set of a cell line
with an allele score of zero (i.e. ffSS) is notable because
it did not allow an evaluation of the activity of this
genotype. The obvious explanation for this absence is
the fact that, since hVDR ff and SS homozygotes are
relatively uncommon among Caucasians (19 and 15%,
respectively), the combination of ffSS would, therefore,
represent a rare genotype (estimated frequency about
3% in Caucasians). Given the observed correlation be-
tween allele score and fold-induction by 1,25(OH)2D3
(Fig. 8B), it is predicted that cells with this genotype

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

155

would have very low relative transcriptional activity. A
recent epidemiological study (Hutchinson et al., 2000),
in which a large cohort with malignant melanoma was
genotyped at the T/t and F/f loci, supports this conclu-
sion. It was found that fftt (recall that t is often linked
to S) had signiﬁcantly thicker tumors (P=0.001).
These results intimate that the fftt allele combination
might be associated with less active hVDR, as VDR has
been reported to have antiproliferative effects that
might be expected to counter the malignant phenotype
(Haussler et al., 1998). Clearly, more ﬁbroblast lines
must be examined to answer these questions, and it will
be interesting to determine if ffSS hVDR cell
lines
actually possess very low hVDR activity. Should this be
the case, the provocative possibility could be raised that
this rare ffSS hVDR genotype might be so disadvanta-
geous with respect to calcium and bone metabolism
that it has been sharply reduced in the gene pool.

The two ﬁbroblast lines in the present panel from
patients with William’s Syndrome exhibited very differ-
ent hVDR activities, with the endogenous VDR in the
DWF-CV line displaying extremely high (100-fold) in-
duction by 1,25(OH)2D3, and the DWF-TW line dis-
playing near-average activity (23-fold induction). The
extremely high activity of the DWF-CV line (three
standard deviations above the mean of 28924 fold-in-
duction) suggests a possible association with the hyper-
calcemia often seen in patients with William’s
Syndrome. However, because the great majority of
William’s Syndrome cases involve a chromosomal dele-
tion at 7q11.23 (Ewart et al., 1993), and the hVDR
gene resides on chromosome 12, this syndrome would
appear to be unrelated to VDR action (as seems to be
the case with patient DWF-TW). However, it is con-
ceivable that patient DWF-CV, whose ﬁbroblasts ex-
hibit extremely elevated VDR activity, may represent
an atypical William’s case that does involve increased
sensitivity to 1,25(OH)2D3, a mechanism that has al-
ready been speculated for isolated cases resembling
Williams’s Syndrome (Ghirri et al., 1999).

Concerning the three osteoporotic patients in the
current sample set, two ﬁbroblast lines showed normal
hVDR activity, but a third (Ran Nor, from a 69-year-
old male) displayed very low induction of the reporter
gene (6.2-fold versus the average of 28-fold). The low
activity of hVDR in the Ran Nor cell sample could, in
theory, be related to the low bone density of osteoporo-
sis. However, osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease
and, therefore, a very large study would be required to
test any relationship between its etiology and hVDR
alleles.

The lowest induction of the tested reporter construct
by 1,25(OH)2D3 (1.75-fold) was observed in the trans-
fected cell line HS 144.We, taken from a 5-week-old
embryo. These cells represent one of two prenatal cell
lines in the present panel; thus, one possible explana-

tion for the very low hVDR activity is that cells from
this early gestational stage may not yet be differentiated
sufﬁciently to express VDR at levels seen postnatally.
However, the other fetal cell line, HE-SK (exact fetal
age unknown), displayed a slightly above average in-
duction of 35.4-fold. Further arguing against the above
interpretation is the observation from this laboratory
that, with the exception of tissues like intestine that are
phenotypically responsive to vitamin D in the adult,
VDR expression has actually been shown to diminish in
rat and chick tissues such as muscle and liver when they
mature beyond the embryonic stage (M.R. Haussler
and K. Yamaoka, unpublished data). Other groups
have also observed VDR expression in various embry-
onic and fetal tissues (Takeuchi et al., 1994; Johnson et
al., 1995; Delvin et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 1996;
Veenstra et al., 1998; Segura et al., 1999). Finally, given
that the HS 144.We line has an allele score of 1
(genotype FfSS),
its observed fold-induction of 1.75
resides between a predicted value of 5.3-fold stimula-
tion by 1,25(OH)2D3 using the regression line for all 19
other lines, and a prediction of negligible stimulation
(i.e. close to 1.0-fold) for the ‘low group’ regression line
(both values calculated from plots similar to that of
Fig. 8B, but omitting the HS 144.We data point). Thus,
the observed HS 144.We hVDR transcriptional activity
is not outside the predicted range for its allele score.
Regardless, the data do not rule out early developmen-
tal-stage variations in human VDR expression, a topic
that deserves further study.

The presence of two distinct groupings of hVDR
activity versus allele score at the F/f plus L/S loci in
Fig. 8B argues in favor of the existence of another
variable that inﬂuences innate hVDR activity, at least
in ﬁbroblasts. There are a number of potential variables
to consider, including such parameters as age and sex
of the patients from whom the cells were taken. An
analysis of these variables in the current sample set
reveals that, although the gender distribution between
the high and low groups of Fig. 8B is similar (60 and
50% male, respectively), the average age is somewhat
higher in the low group, but this difference is without
statistical signiﬁcance (20.9 versus 4.8 years, P=0.11).
Thus, based on the current data, it is contended that
age and sex of the cell donors would not be satisfactory
explanations for the existence of a high and a low
activity group.

Instead, the hypothesis put forth in the present com-
munication (Fig. 9) is that there exists one or more
additional polymorphic variations in the hVDR gene
beyond those at the F/f locus and in the 3% cluster
(Apa/Bsm/Taq and L/S) that affect(s) hVDR activity.
The coding exons of the hVDR gene have been studied
rather extensively, and have yielded numerous point
mutations causing hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets
(Hawa et al., 1996; Lin et al., 1996; Whitﬁeld et al.,

156

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

1996; Haussler et al., 1998), but no evidence has been
presented for the occurrence of common polymorphic
sites other than the Fok I site in exon II and the linked
cluster of sites in the exon VIII–IX region. Yet recent
investigations into the portion of the hVDR gene en-
coding the 5% untranslated region (5% UTR) have re-
vealed a surprising complex of at least seven exons
(denoted IA-IG, see Fig. 9, top left), with evidence for
alternative splicing (Miyamoto et al., 1997; Crofts et
al., 1998). It is possible that undiscovered common
polymorphic sites may exist in this newly described
complex of multiple exons at the 5% end of the gene.
Such polymorphisms could even alter VDR protein
structure by introducing in-frame initiator methionine
codons leading to the expression of VDRs with N-ter-
minal extensions, as already proposed by one research
group (Crofts et al., 1998).

Still another possibility is that polymorphisms in the
5% region of the VDR gene might affect the activity of
one of the three proposed hVDR promoters (Crofts et
al., 1998), leading to the expression of altered quantities
of VDR proteins under physiologic conditions. Here
again, a precedent exists from a recent report (Arai et
al., 1999 J. Bone Miner. Res. 14, S191, Abstract T084),
which describes a polymorphism in a binding site for

Cdx-2, a homeodomain protein related to caudal (posi-
tion of Cdx binding site in the hVDR gene is shown in
Fig. 9, top left). The importance of Cdx-2 for intestine-
speciﬁc expression of hVDR was demonstrated earlier
(Yamamoto et al., 1999). It is, of course, not possible to
invoke this polymorphism to explain the present results
in ﬁbroblast lines, given the intestine-speciﬁc nature of
Cdx-2 regulated expression (Suh et al., 1994). However,
the existence of this polymorphism should certainly be
considered in epidemiological studies relating VDR-me-
diated intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate
as they impact BMD and parathyroid gland function.
Indeed, in a large cohort of Japanese women, the A
allele at the Cdx-2 locus correlated with higher BMD in
the lumbar spine, consistent with a slightly greater
activity of a VDR promoter construct incorporating the
Cdx-A type element (Arai et al., 1999, J. Bone Miner.
Res. 14, S191, Abstract T084).

Rather than evoking Cdx-2 or any other known
polymorphism to explain the present results, we prefer
the interpretation that a novel polymorphism exists,
likely located in the incompletely characterized 5% re-
gion of the hVDR gene. A full recognition of the
genetic complexity of VDR action in humans may
eventually allow for accurate prediction of VDR activ-

Fig. 9. Summary of common polymorphic variations in the hVDR gene that may inﬂuence VDR activity. The exon arrangement (top) is described
in Fig. 2 and the associated text. The long (L) variant of the singlet(A) repeat in exon IX is proposed herein to be associated with increased VDR
amount. A speculative mechanism for this effect is the enhanced ability of ]17 consecutive As to recruit poly(A) binding protein, which would
presumably stabilize VDR mRNA and/or promote its translation into hVDR protein (see text). The F/f polymorphism in exon II has likewise
been shown to be associated with VDR activity, with the F isoform displaying both moderately higher transcriptional activity, as well as
measurably greater interaction, in vitro, with TFIIB (Jurutka et al., 2000). Recently, a third hVDR polymorphism has been described upstream
of exon IG in a binding site for the intestine-speciﬁc enhancer protein Cdx-2 (Arai et al., 1999, J. Bone Miner. Res. 14, S191, Abstract T084). This
polymorphism may be signiﬁcant for its effects on hVDR expression in intestinal cells (Yamamoto et al., 1999). All three of the illustrated
polymorphisms are proposed to affect either the quantity of expressed VDR in human tissues (Cdx-2 and L/S), or the ability of VDR to interact
with other proteins such as TFIIB (F/f, as illustrated at bottom right), in order to impact the transcription of target genes. Finally, it is suggested
that other functionally relevant VDR gene polymorphisms may exist, especially in the recently-described complex of exons encoding the 5%-UTR.

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

157

ity in individual patients based on genotype, along with
an enhanced ability to assess disease risk, as well as
response to pharmacologic agents related to VDR
action.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by National Institutes of

Health grants to Mark R. Haussler.

References

Arai, H., Miyamoto, K.-I., Taketani, Y., Yamamoto, H., Iemori, Y.,
Morita, K., Tonai, T., Nishisho, T., Mori, S., Takeda, E., 1997. A
vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism in the translation initia-
tion codon: effect on protein activity and relation to bone mineral
density in Japanese women. J. Bone Miner. Res. 12, 915–921.

Baer, B.W., Kornberg, R.D., 1980. Repeating structure of cytoplas-
mic poly(A)-ribonucleoprotein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77,
1890–1892.

Baker, A.R., McDonnell, D.P., Hughes, M.R., Crisp, T.M., Mangels-
dorf, D.J., Haussler, M.R., Pike, J.W., Shine, J., O’Malley, B.W.,
1988. Cloning and expression of full-length cDNA encoding hu-
man vitamin D receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 3294–
3298.

Baniahmad, A., Ha, I., Reinberg, D., Tsai, S., Tsai, M.-J., O’Malley,
B.W., 1993. Interaction of human thyroid-hormone receptor-beta
with transcription factor TFIIB may mediate target gene derepres-
sion and activation by thyroid-hormone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 90, 8832–8836.

Carling, T., Rastad, J., Akerstrom, G., Westin, G., 1998. Vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and parathyroid hormone messenger ribonucleic
acid levels correspond to polymorphic VDR alleles in human
parathyroid tumors. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 83, 2255–2259.
Cheng, W.C., Tsai, K.S., 1999. The vitamin D receptor start codon
polymorphism (Fok1) and bone mineral density in premenopausal
women in Taiwan. Osteoporosis Int. 9, 545–549.

Colin, E.M., Weel, A.E., Uitterlinden, A.G., Buurman, C.J., Birken-
hager, J.C., Pols, H.A., Van Leeuwen, J.P., 2000. Consequences
of vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms for growth inhibition
of cultured human peripheral blood mononuclear cells by 1,25-di-
hydroxyvitamin D3. Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxford) 52, 211–216.

Correa, P., Rastad, J., Schwarz, P., Westin, G., Kindmark, A.,
Lundgren, E., Akerstrom, G., Carling, T., 1999. The vitamin D
receptor (VDR) start codon polymorphism in primary hyper-
parathyroidism and parathyroid VDR messenger ribonucleic acid
levels. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84, 1690–1694.

Crofts, L.A., Hancock, M.S., Morrison, N.A., Eisman, J.A., 1998.
Multiple promoters direct the tissue-speciﬁc expression of novel
N-terminal variant human vitamin D receptor gene transcripts.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 10529–10534.

Curran, J.E., Vaughan, T., Lea, R.A., Weinstein, S.R., Morrison,
N.A., Grifﬁths, L.R., 1999. Association of a vitamin D receptor
polymorphism with sporadic breast cancer development. Int. J.
Cancer 83, 723–726.

Delvin, E.E., Lopez, V., Levy, E., Menard, D., 1996. Calcitriol
differentially modulates mRNA encoding calcitriol receptors and
calcium-binding protein 9 kDa in human fetal jejunum. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 224, 544–548.

Deo, R.C., Bonanno, J.B., Sonenberg, N., Burley, S.K., 1999. Recog-
nition of polyadenylate RNA by the poly(A)-binding protein. Cell
98, 835–845.

Durrin, L.K., Haile, R.W., Ingles, S.A., Coetzee, G.A., 1999. Vitamin
D receptor 3%-untranslated region polymorphisms: lack of effect
on mRNA stability. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1453, 311–320.

Eccleshall, T.R., Garnero, P., Gross, C., Delmas, P.D., Feldman, D.,
1998. Lack of correlation between start codon polymorphism of
the vitamin D receptor gene and bone mineral density in pre-
menopausal French women: the OFELY study. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 13, 31–35.

Ewart, A.K., Morris, C.A., Atkinson, D., Jin, W., Sternes, K.,
Spallone, P., Stock, A.D., Leppert, M., Keating, M.T., 1993.
Hemizygosity at the elastin locus in a developmental disorder,
Williams syndrome. Nat. Genet. 5, 11–16.

Faraco, J.H., Morrison, N.A., Baker, A., Shine, J., Frossard, P.M.,
1989. ApaI dimorphism at the human vitamin D receptor gene
locus. Nucl. Acids Res. 17, 2150.

Ferrari, S., Rizzoli, R., Manen, D., Slosman, D., Bonjour, J.P., 1998.
Vitamin D receptor gene start codon polymorphisms (Fok I) and
bone mineral density: interaction with age, dietary calcium, and
3%-end region polymorphisms. J. Bone Miner. Res. 13, 925–930.
Ferrari, S., Manen, D., Bonjour, J.P., Slosman, D., Rizzoli, R., 1999.
Bone mineral mass and calcium and phosphate metabolism in
young men: relationships with vitamin D receptor allelic polymor-
phisms. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84, 2043–2048.

Gennari, L., Becherini, L., Mansani, R., Masi, L., Falchetti, A.,
Morelli, A., Colli, E., Gonnelli, S., Cepollaro, C., Brandi, M.L.,
1999. Fok I polymorphism at translation initiation site of the
vitamin D receptor gene predicts bone mineral density and verte-
bral fractures in postmenopausal Italian women. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 14, 1379–1386.

Ghirri, P., Bottone, U., Coccoli, L., Bernardini, M., Vuerich, M.,
Cuttano, A., Riparbelli, C., Pellegrinetti, G., Boldrini, A., 1999.
Symptomatic hypercalcemia in the ﬁrst months of life: calcium-
regulating hormones and treatment. J Endocrinol. Invest. 22,
349–353.

Gill, R.K., Atkins, L.M., Hollis, B.W., Bell, N.H., 1998. Mapping the
domains of the interaction of the vitamin D receptor and steroid
receptor coactivator-1. Mol. Endocrinol. 12, 57–65.

Gross, C., Eccleshall, T.R., Malloy, P.J., Villa, M.L., Marcus, R.,
Feldman, D., 1996. The presence of a polymorphism at the
translation initiation site of the vitamin D receptor gene is associ-
ated with low bone mineral density in postmenopausal Mexican-
American women. J. Bone Miner. Res. 11, 1850–1855.

Gross, C., Krishnan, A.V., Malloy, P.J., Eccleshall, T.R., Zhao,
X.Y., Feldman, D., 1998. The vitamin D receptor gene start
codon polymorphism: a functional analysis of Fok I variants. J.
Bone Miner. Res. 13, 1691–1699.

Harris, S.S., Eccleshall, T.R., Gross, C., Dawson-Hughes, B., Feld-
man, D., 1997. The vitamin D receptor start codon polymorphism
(Fok I) and bone mineral density in premenopausal American
black and white women. J. Bone Miner. Res. 12, 1043–1048.

Haussler, M.R., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Haussler, C.A., Hsieh, J.-C.,
Thompson, P.D., Selznick, S.H., Encinas Dominguez, C., Ju-
rutka, P.W., 1998. The nuclear vitamin D receptor: biological and
molecular regulatory properties revealed. J. Bone Miner. Res. 13,
325–349.

Hawa, N.S., Cockerill, F.J., Vadher, S., Hewison, M., Rut, A.K.,
Pike, J.W., O’Riordan, J.L., Farrow, S.M., 1996. Identiﬁcation of
a novel mutation in hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets causing
exon skipping. Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf) 45, 85–92.

Hsieh, J.-C., Jurutka, P.W., Galligan, M.A., Terpening, C.M., Haus-
sler, C.A., Samuels, D.S., Shimizu, Y., Shimizu, N., Haussler,
M.R., 1991. Human vitamin D receptor is selectively phosphory-
lated by protein kinase C on serine 51, a residue crucial to its
trans-activation function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 9315–
9319.

Hsieh, J.-C., Jurutka, P.W., Selznick, S.H., Reeder, M.C., Haussler,
C.A., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Haussler, M.R., 1995. The T-box near the

158

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

zinc ﬁngers of the human vitamin D receptor is required for
heterodimeric DNA binding and transactivation. Biochem. Bio-
phys. Res. Commun. 215, 1–7.

Hsieh, J.-C., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Oza, A.K., Dang, H.T.L., Price, J.N.,
Galligan, M.A., Jurutka, P.W., Thompson, P.D., Haussler, C.A.,
Haussler, M.R., 1999. Characterization of unique DNA binding
and transcriptional activation functions in the carboxyl-terminal
extension of the zinc ﬁnger region in the human vitamin D
receptor. Biochemistry 38, 16347–16358.

Hutchinson, P.E., Osborne, J.E., Lear, J.T., Smith, A.G., Bowers,
P.W., Morris, P.N., Jones, P.W., York, C., Strange, R.C., Fryer,
A.A., 2000. Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms are associated
with altered prognosis in patients with malignant melanoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 6, 498–504.

Ingles, S.A., Haile, R.W., Henderson, B.E., Kolonel, L.N., Nakaichi,
G., Shi, C.Y., Yu, M.C., Ross, R.K., Coetzee, G.A., 1997a.
Strength of linkage disequilibrium between two vitamin D recep-
tor markers in ﬁve ethnic groups:
implications for association
studies. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 6, 93–98.

Ingles, S.A., Ross, R.K., Yu, M.C., Irvine, R.A., La Pera, G., Haile,
R.W., Coetzee, G.A., 1997b. Association of prostate cancer risk
with genetic polymorphisms in vitamin D receptor and androgen
receptor. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 89, 166–170.

Ingles, S.A., Haile, R., Henderson, B., Kolonel, L., Coetzee, G.,
1997c. Association of vitamin D receptor genetic polymorphism
with breast cancer risk in African-American and Hispanic women.
In: Norman, A.W., et al. (Eds.), Vitamin D: Chemistry, Biology
and Clinical Applications of the Steroid Hormone. University of
California, Printing and Reprographics, Riverside, pp. 813–814.
Johnson, J.A., Grande, J.P., Roche, P.C., Sweeney, W.E. Jr, Avner,
E.D., Kumar, R., 1995. 1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor on-
togenesis in fetal renal development. Am. J. Physiol. 269, F419–
428.

Johnson, J.A., Grande, J.P., Roche, P.C., Kumar, R., 1996. On-
togeny of the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor in fetal rat bone.
J. Bone Miner. Res. 11, 56–61.

Jurutka, P.W., Hsieh, J.-C., Remus, L.S., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Thomp-
son, P.D., Haussler, C.A., Blanco, J.C.G., Ozato, K., Haussler,
M.R., 1997. Mutations in the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor
identifying C-terminal amino acids required for transcriptional
activation that are functionally dissociated from hormone bind-
ing, heterodimeric DNA binding and interaction with basal tran-
scription factor IIB, in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 14592–14599.
Jurutka, P.W., Remus, L.S., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Thompson, P.D.,
Hsieh, J.C., Zitzer, H., Tavakkoli, P., Galligan, M.A., Dang,
H.T.L., Haussler, C.A., Haussler, M.R., 2000. The polymorphic
N terminus in human vitamin D receptor isoforms inﬂuences
transcriptional activity by modulating interaction with transcrip-
tion factor IIB. Mol. Endocrinol. 14, 401–420.

Jurutka, P.W., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Hsieh, J.-C., Thompson, P.D., Haus-
sler, C.A., Haussler, M.R., 2001. Molecular nature of the vitamin
D receptor and its role in regulation of gene expression. Rev.
Endocrinol. Met. Disorders, 2, 203–216.

Kato, S., Takeyama, K., Kitanaka, S., Murayama, A., Sekine, K.,
Yoshizawa, T., 1999. In vivo function of VDR in gene expression-
VDR knock-out mice. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 69, 247–
251.

Kraichely, D.M., Collins, J.J. III, DeLisle, R.K., MacDonald, P.N.,
1999. The autonomous transactivation domain in helix H3 of the
vitamin D receptor is required for transactivation and coactivator
interaction. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 14352–14358.

Kurabayashi, T., Tomita, M., Matsushita, H., Yahata, T., Honda,
A., Takakuwa, K., Tanaka, K., 1999. Association of vitamin D
and estrogen receptor gene polymorphism with the effect of
hormone replacement
therapy on bone mineral density in
Japanese women. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 180, 1115–1120.

Le, H., Tanguay, R.L., Balasta, M.L., Wei, C.C., Browning, K.S.,
Metz, A.M., Goss, D.J., Gallie, D.R., 1997. Translation initiation
factors eIF-iso4G and eIF-4B interact with the poly(A)-binding
protein and increase its RNA binding activity. J. Biol. Chem. 272,
16247–16255.

Li, Y.C., Amling, M., Pirro, A.E., Priemel, M., Meuse, J., Baron, R.,
Delling, G., Demay, M.B., 1998. Normalization of mineral ion
homeostasis by dietary means prevents hyperparathyroidism, rick-
ets, and osteomalacia, but not alopecia in vitamin D receptor-ab-
lated mice. Endocrinology 139, 4391–4396.

Lin, N.U.-T., Malloy, P.J., Sakati, N., Al-Ashwal, A., Feldman, D.,
1996. A novel mutation in the deoxyribonucleic acid-binding
domain of the vitamin D receptor causes hereditary 1,25-dihy-
droxyvitamin D-resistant rickets. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 81,
2564–2569.

Lucotte, G., Mercier, G., Burckel, A., 1999. The vitamin D receptor
FokI start codon polymorphism and bone mineral density in
osteoporotic postmenopausal French women. Clin. Genet. 56,
221–224.

Miyamoto, K.-i., Kesterson, R.A., Yamamoto, H., Taketani, Y.,
Nishiwaki, E., Tatsumi, S., Inoue, Y., Morita, K., Takeda, E.,
Pike, J.W., 1997. Structural organization of the human vitamin D
receptor chromosomal gene and its promoter. Mol. Endocrinol.
11, 1165–1179.

Mocharla, H., Butch, A.W., Pappas, A.A., Flick, J.T., Weinstein,
R.S., De Togni, P., Jilka, R.L., Roberson, P.K., Parﬁtt, A.M.,
Manolagas, S.C., 1997. Quantiﬁcation of vitamin D receptor
mRNA by competitive polymerase chain reaction in PBMC: lack
of correspondence with common allelic variants. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 12, 726–733.

Morrison, N.A., Yeoman, R., Kelly, P.J., Eisman, J.A., 1992. Contri-
bution of trans-acting factor alleles to normal physiological vari-
ability: vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms and circulating
osteocalcin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 6665–6669.

Morrison, N.A., Qi, J.C., Tokita, A., Kelly, P.J., Crofts, L., Nguyen,
T.V., Sambrook, P.N., Eisman, J.A., 1994. Prediction of bone
density from vitamin D receptor alleles. Nature 367, 284–287.

Munroe, D., Jacobson, A., 1990. Tales of poly(A): a review. Gene 91,

151–158.

Nakajima, S., Hsieh, J.-C., MacDonald, P.N., Galligan, M.A., Haus-
sler, C.A., Whitﬁeld, G.K., Haussler, M.R., 1994. The C-terminal
region of the vitamin D receptor is essential to form a complex
with a receptor auxiliary factor required for high afﬁnity binding
to the vitamin D responsive element. Mol. Endocrinol. 8, 159–
172.

Niimi, T., Tomita, H., Sato, S., Kawaguchi, H., Akita, K., Maeda,
H., Sugiura, Y., Ueda, R., 1999. Vitamin D receptor gene poly-
morphism in patients with sarcoidosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care
Med. 160, 1107–1109.

Rachez, C., Lemon, B.D., Suldan, Z., Bromleigh, V., Gamble, M.,
Naar, A.M., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., Freedman,
L.P., 1999. Ligand-dependent transcription activation by nuclear
receptors requires the DRIP complex. Nature 398, 824–828.

Renaud, J.-P., Rochel, N., Ruff, M., Vivat, V., Chambon, P., Grone-
meyer, H., Moras, D., 1995. Crystal structure of the RAR-g
ligand-binding domain bound to all-trans retinoic acid. Nature
378, 681–689.

Rochel, N., Wurtz, J.M., Mitschler, A., Klaholz, B., Moras, D., 2000.
The crystal structure of the nuclear receptor for vitamin D bound
to its natural ligand. Mol. Cell 5, 173–179.

Ruggiero, M., Pacini, S., Aterini, S., Fallai, C., Ruggiero, C., Pacini,
P., 1998. Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism is associated
with metastatic breast cancer. Oncol. Res. 10, 43–46.

Saijo, T., Ito, M., Takeda, E., Mahbubul Huq, A.H.M., Naito, E.,
Yokota, I., Sone, T., Pike, J.W., Kuroda, Y., 1991. A unique
mutation in the vitamin D receptor gene in three Japanese pa-
tients with vitamin D-dependent rickets type II: utility of single

G. Kerr Whitﬁeld et al. /Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 177 (2001) 145–159

159

stranded conformation polymorphism analysis for heterozygous
carrier detection. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49, 668–673.

Segura, C., Alonso, M., Fraga, C., Garcia-Caballero, T., Dieguez, C.,
Perez-Fernandez, R., 1999. Vitamin D receptor ontogenesis in rat
liver. Histochem. Cell Biol. 112, 163–167.

Sosa, M., Torres, A., Martin, N., Salido, E., Liminana, J.M., Barrios,
Y., De Miguel, E., Betancor, P., 2000. The distribution of two
different vitamin D receptor polymorphisms (Bsm I and start
codon) in primary hyperparathyroidism. J. Intern. Med. 247,
124–130.

Suh, E., Chen, L., Taylor, J., Traber, P.G., 1994. A homeodomain
protein related to caudal regulates intestine-speciﬁc gene tran-
scription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 7340–7351.

Szpirer, J., Szpirer, C., Riviere, M., Levan, G., Marynen, P., Cassi-
man, J.J., Wiese, R., DeLuca, H.F., 1991. The Sp1 transcription
factor gene (SP1) and the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor gene
(VDR) are colocalized on human chromosome arm 12q and rat
chromosome 7. Genomics 11, 168–173.

Takeuchi, A., Okano, T., Sekimoto, H., Kobayashi, T., 1994. The
enzymatic formation of 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 from 25-
hydroxyvitamin D3 in the liver of fetal rats. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. C Pharmacol. Toxicol. Endocrinol. 109, 1–7.

Tao, C., Yu, T., Garnett, S., Briody, J., Knight, J., Woodhead, H.,
Cowell, C.T., 1998. Vitamin D receptor alleles predict growth and
bone density in girls. Arch. Dis. Child. 79, 488–493.

Terpening, C.M., Haussler, C.A., Jurutka, P.W., Galligan, M.A.,
Komm, B.S., Haussler, M.R., 1991. The vitamin D-responsive
element in the rat bone gla protein is an imperfect direct repeat
that cooperates with other cis-elements in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3-mediated transcriptional activation. Mol. Endocrinol. 5, 373–
385.

Veenstra, T.D., Prufer, K., Koenigsberger, C., Brimijoin, S.W.,
Grande, J.P., Kumar, R., 1998. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 recep-
tors in the central nervous system of the rat embryo. Brain Res.
804, 193–205.

Verbeek, W., Gombart, A.F., Shiohara, M., Campbell, M., Koefﬂer,
H.P., 1997. Vitamin D receptor: no evidence for allele-speciﬁc
mRNA stability in cells which are heterozygous for the Taq I

restriction enzyme polymorphism. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com-
mun. 238, 77–80.

Videman, T., Leppavuori, J., Kaprio, J., Battie, M.C., Gibbons, L.E.,
Peltonen, L., Koskenvuo, M., 1998. Intragenic polymorphisms of
the vitamin D receptor gene associated with intervertebral disc
degeneration. Spine 23, 2477–2485.

Wagner, R.L., Apriletti, J.W., McGrath, M.E., West, B.L., Baxter,
J.D., Fletterick, R.J., 1995. A structural role for hormone in the
thyroid hormone receptor. Nature 378, 690–697.

Watanabe, M., Fukutome, K., Murata, M., Uemura, H., Kubota, Y.,
Kawamura, J., Yatani, R., 1999. Signiﬁcance of vitamin D recep-
tor gene polymorphism for prostate cancer risk in Japanese.
Anticancer Res. 19, 4511–4514.

Whitﬁeld, G.K., Hsieh, J.-C., Nakajima, S., MacDonald, P.N.,
Thompson, P.D., Jurutka, P.W., Haussler, C.A., Haussler, M.R.,
1995. A highly conserved region in the hormone binding domain
of the human vitamin D receptor contains residues vital for
heterodimerization with retinoid X receptor and for transcrip-
tional activation. Mol. Endocrinol. 9, 1166–1179.

Whitﬁeld, G.K., Selznick, S.H., Haussler, C.A., Hsieh, J.-C., Galli-
gan, M.A., Jurutka, P.W., Thompson, P.D., Lee, S.M., Zerwekh,
J.E., Haussler, M.R., 1996. Vitamin D receptors from patients
with resistance to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3: point mutations
confer reduced transactivation in response to ligand and impaired
interaction with the retinoid X receptor heterodimeric partner.
Mol. Endocrinol. 10, 1617–1631.

Whitﬁeld, G.K., Jurutka, P.W., Haussler, C.A., Haussler, M.R.,
1999. Steroid hormone receptors: evolution, ligands and molecu-
lar basis of biologic function. J. Cell. Biochem. Suppl. 32/33,
110–122.

Wood, R.J., Fleet, J.C., 1998. The genetics of osteoporosis: vitamin D

receptor polymorphisms. Ann. Rev. Nutr. 18, 233–258.

Yamamoto, H., Miyamoto, K., Li, B., Taketani, Y., Kitano, M.,
Inoue, Y., Morita, K., Pike, J.W., Takeda, E., 1999. The caudal-
related homeodomain protein Cdx-2 regulates vitamin D receptor
gene expression in the small intestine. J. Bone Miner. Res. 14,
240–247.

.

