Nutritional ‘Omics’ Technologies for Elucidating the Role(s)
of Bioactive Food Components in Colon Cancer Prevention

Dietary Components Modify Gene Expression: Implications for
Carcinogenesis1

Kan Yang,* WanCai Yang, John Mariadason, Anna Velcich, Martin Lipkin,* and
Leonard Augenlicht2
Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Monteﬁore Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10467 and *Strang Cancer Prevention
Center, New York, NY

ABSTRACT Mouse genetic models that probe important pathways in intestinal cell maturation, such as cell-cycle
regulation, apoptosis, and, especially, lineage speciﬁc differentiation, have provided profound insight into the
underlying mechanisms of intestinal tumor formation and progression. However, a wealth of epidemiological and
experimental data indicates that environment, especially the diet, is a principal determinant of relative risk for tumor
development. We have demonstrated that even in mouse models in which tumor incidence is strongly initiated by
genetic manipulation of genes, such as Apc, p21WAF1/cip1, and p27Kip1, a Western-style diet that is high in fat and
low in calcium and vitamin D can dramatically increase and accelerate tumor formation. Moreover, experiments
show that modulation of calcium and vitamin D levels can substantially inﬂuence tumor formation in both the mouse
genetic models, as well as in a new dietary model that appears to mimic the development of sporadic colon cancer.
Finally, analysis of gene expression proﬁles provides important insights into how diets may alter metabolic proﬁles
and regulatory pathways that inﬂuence probability of tumor formation in the histologically and physiologically
normal intestinal mucosa.

J. Nutr. 135: 2710 –2714, 2005.

KEY WORDS:

● Western-style diet ● gene expression ● colon cancer

Epidemiological studies have identiﬁed diet as a major
variable that accounts for organ-site speciﬁc differences in
incidence of cancer in patient populations in different coun-
tries and geographical areas. For colon cancer, these differ-
ences in incidence are profound. Moreover, there are several
examples of migrant populations that clearly link these differ-
ences in incidence to environmental factors. For example,
native Japanese historically had a relatively low incidence of
colon cancer relative to stomach cancer. Upon migration to
the Hawaiian Islands, within one generation, this relative
incidence begins to shift, and, within 2 generations, the inci-
dence of colon cancer is nearly equivalent to the high rate of

1 Presented as part of the symposium “Nutritional ‘Omics’ Technologies for
Elucidating the Roles of Bioactive Food Components in Colon Cancer Prevention”
given at the 2005 Experimental Biology meeting on April 5, 2005, San Diego, CA.
The symposium was sponsored by the American Society for Nutritional Sciences
and in part by the Diet and Cancer and Dietary Bioactive Food Components
Research Interest Sections. The proceedings are published as a supplement to
The Journal of Nutrition. This supplement is the responsibility of the Guest Editors
to whom the Editor of The Journal of Nutrition has delegated supervision of both
technical conformity to the published regulations of The Journal of Nutrition and
general oversight of the scientiﬁc merit of each article. The opinions expressed in
this publication are those of the authors and are not attributable to the sponsors
or the publisher, editor, or editorial board of The Journal of Nutrition. The guest
editors for the supplement publication are Cindy D. Davis, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, and Norman Hord, Department of Food
Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University.

2 To whom correspondence should be addressed.

E-mail: augen@aecom.yu.edu.

the U.S. white population. Thus, within 2 generations, there
is almost an order of magnitude shift in the relative incidence
of colon cancer. Two generations is far too short a time for the
genetics of the population to have shifted signiﬁcantly, clearly
demonstrating that environmental factors—most likely diet—
account for this dramatic change. Conﬁrmation of this is the
fact that as the citizens of Japan have adopted a more Western-
style diet, their incidence of colon cancer has begun to in-
crease relative to the historically lower levels. To put this in a
practical context, such data indicate that it is theoretically
possible to reduce colon cancer incidence by at least 50%, and
possibly closer to 90%, by shifts in diet. If this could be
realized, this would be an astounding advance in preventing
this major disease.

There is a wealth of data from rodent model systems, both
chemically, as well as genetically induced intestinal cancer,
that demonstrate the profound inﬂuence of diet on cancer
initiation and progression. There is still, however, a reluctance
on the part of most molecular and cell biologists to accept this
as fundamental to the process of tumorigenesis. We believe
there are 2 reasons for this. First, there is a fundamental
misconception that diet may only play a role in establishing
risk for tumor formation in those without genetic predisposi-
tion. However, there are both population data and experimen-
tal data that indicate this is not correct. For example, hered-
itary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is an inherited syndrome
that imposes a very high risk for development of intestinal

0022-3166/05 $8.00 © 2005 American Society for Nutrition.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/11/2710/4669904
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

2710

DIETARY COMPONENTS AND GENE EXPRESSION

2711

cancer in affected families. However, it is instructive to note
that in the original studies of this familial cancer syndrome by
Warthin in the early 1900s, cancer family “G” had a high
incidence of gastric cancer, which was also the principle
sporadic gastrointestinal cancer in the United States at that
time (1). By mid-century, when family “G” was revisited by
Lynch, gastrointestinal cancer in this family was still high but
had shifted in site to colon cancer, which had replaced gastric
cancer as the principle site of sporadic intestinal cancer (2).
Thus, the genetics of the family (i.e., inheritance of a mutant
gene involved in DNA mismatch repair) dictated high cancer
incidence, but the environment (i.e., diet) was responsible for
dictating site speciﬁcity. We will also present data that dem-
onstrate that in every mouse genetic model in which intestinal
cancer is initiated at a very high frequency by inherited ge-
netic mutations, dietary factors still exert a profound effect on
tumor frequency and size, and, in some cases, site of formation.
Therefore, even when high incidence is dictated by genetic
factors, dietary effects can be manifest in terms of modulation
of tumor frequency or size. In terms of clinical management,
there are high-genetic-risk individuals for whom this may not
be relevant. For example, in patients with familial adenoma-
tous polyposis who develop hundreds of polyps, dietary alter-
ations may decrease this number signiﬁcantly, but even a 50%
decrease in polyp number would not dictate changes in clinical
care. However, this does not alter the fact that diet can play a
profound role in the penetrance of the disease on a per tumor
basis.

The second reason for the lack of attention among molec-
ular biologists to the importance of diet is the difﬁculty in
attributing dietary alterations in probability of tumor forma-
tion to speciﬁc biochemical and molecular alterations. Con-
sider that for the ⬃90% of colon cancers diagnosed in the
United States termed sporadic colon cancer, the elevation of
the probability of tumor formation by dietary factors may
involve subtle affects on the intestinal mucosa that are inte-
grated over 6 to 7 decades of life. During this time, there are
⬃1012 cell divisions in the mucosa and even under the inﬂu-
ence of diets that elevate risk signiﬁcantly, generally a single
tumor forms. During this period of over 6 decades, the intes-
tinal mucosa essentially functions normally and exhibits no
pathology. We are therefore faced with the fact that there are
very subtle shifts in physiology and metabolism that may
increase the probability of only 1 of 1012 cell divisions under-
going a change leading to neoplasia. Further, altered cells must
also be retained in the mucosa, rather than being sloughed
into the lumen, or undergoing apoptosis or anoikis. It is
therefore difﬁcult to design experiments to identify alterations
that may be of signiﬁcance. As regards to this, K. Yang, H.
Newmark, and M. Lipkin (Strang Cancer Prevention Center;
unpublished results) have developed a new model of rodent
colon cancer modulated by diet that we believe mimics the
generation of human sporadic intestinal cancer. We will dis-
cuss data on altered pathways that may perturb intestinal
homeostasis in this model and thus establish an increased
probability of tumor formation.

Dietary interaction with genetic factors in intestinal tumor
formation

We have used 2 versions of a Western-style diet (WD)3 to
investigate the interaction of dietary and genetic factors in the

3 Abbreviations used: cdki, cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor; NWD, new

Western-style diet; WD, Western-style diet.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/11/2710/4669904
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

TABLE 1

Mouse Western-style diets1

Ingredient

AIN-76A Western diet ⫹Calcium/vitamin D

Fat (corn oil, %)
Calcium, mg/g
Vitamin D, IU/g
Phosphorous, mg/g
Fiber (cellulose, %)
Folic Acid, ␮g/g
DL-methionine, %
L-Cysteine, %
Choline bitartrate, %
Kcal/g (approximate)

5
5
1
4
5
2
0.3
—
0.2
3.6

1 Data from references 3, 5, 6.

20
0.5
0.11
3.6
2
0.23
—
0.3
0.12
4.5

20
7.0
2.3
3.6
2
0.23
—
0.3
0.12
4.5

mouse (see Table 1). The original WD was formulated by
Newmark and Lipkin to mimic major risk factors for intestinal
cancer in developed countries, particularly in the United
States (3–5). This diet is high in fat and low in calcium and
vitamin D. It is important to note that these levels are within
the normal range of these components in the U.S. diet. Thus,
based on nutrient density, the levels of calcium and vitamin D
are at the low end of the normal range but are not “deﬁcient”
diets that raise other overt health problems for the mice or for
individuals who consume such diets. The second WD we use
(new Western Diet; NWD) has these same high levels of fat
and low calcium and vitamin D, but also incorporates lower
levels of ﬁber and compounds that contribute to the single
carbon, “methyl donor” pool: folate, methionine, and choline
(6). Lower intakes of these nutrients have each been linked to
higher risk of colon cancer in the U.S. population.

It has been demonstrated that the WD is effective in
increasing tumor formation in Apc1638⫾ mice that inherit an
inactive Apc allele (7). We have reported that additional
inactivation of the gene that encodes the cyclin-dependent
(cdki) p21WAF1/cip1 gene in the same
kinase inhibitor
Apc1638N mice is effective in increasing incidence, multiplic-
ity, and size of intestinal tumors (8). Furthermore, despite the
high initiation and progression of tumors caused by these
genetic factors, maintaining the mice on the WD increased
tumor frequency and volume signiﬁcantly for every p21 geno-
type (p21⫹/⫹,⫹/⫺, or ⫺/⫺) and was additive to the effect of
genotype (8). Moreover, this led to a marked decrease in
animal life span, independent of p21 genotype, compared with
mice fed the control, AIN76A diet (8).

More recently, we have turned our attention to another
cdki, termed p27Kip1. While it had been reported that inacti-
vation of p27 in mice that harbor a mutant Apc allele was
effective in enhancing tumor formation (9), we, in fact, found
that inactivation of p27 alone was sufﬁcient to cause intestinal
tumor formation in mice (10). We have subsequently found
that this is strictly a function of diet: on a standard laboratory
diet, used by most investigators, no tumors form in mice that
are p27⫹/⫹, and very few tumors form in p27⫾ or ⫺/⫺ mice.
However, when fed a deﬁned AIN76A diet, tumor formation
is signiﬁcant for these latter 2 genotypes and increases even
further in the same animals fed the WD (W. C. Yang, K.
Bancroft, and L. Augenlicht, Albert Einstein Cancer Center;
unpublished results). The lack of tumor formation in the
animals fed the diet may be due to inhibitory phytochemicals
in this plant-based diet. Alternatively, the AIN76A diet,
designed to maximize growth of the mice, may be considered
a tumor promoting diet. In either case, the profound affect of

2712

SYMPOSIUM

dietary factors on tumor formation is apparent. Moreover, not
only do Apc⫾, p27⫾ or ⫺/⫺ mice on the AIN76A and WD diet
form tumors but they also exhibit intussusception, a pathology
seen in patients with intestinal tumors, but not reported in
mouse models (W. C. Yang, K. Bancroft, and L. Augenlicht,
Albert Einstein Cancer Center; unpublished results). Finally,
in every mouse model of intestinal cancer that we or our
collaborators have investigated, including models involving
defects in mismatch repair alone or coupled with inherited Apc
mutations, the WD increased tumor formation and generally
produced more tumors in the large intestine (K. Yang and M.
Lipkin, Strang Cancer Prevention Center; unpublished re-
sults). Therefore, it is clear that it is necessary to consider
dietary factors to accurately model human intestinal cancer, as
well as to maximize tumor formation in such models.

A new mouse model of sporadic colon cancer

Newmark et al. (6) reported that the NWD was capable of
causing preneoplastic, as well as some neoplastic lesions, when
fed to wild-type mice for more than 1 y. This has been studied
further by them in an experimental design in which C57Bl/6J
control mice were maintained, upon weaning, on either an
AIN76A diet or the NWD diet. Moreover, since supplemen-
tation of the WD with calcium and vitamin D had been shown
to reverse the increased tumor formation stimulated by the
WD in Apc1638⫾, ApcMin/⫹, and Apc⫾,Mlh1⫾ mice (K. Yang,
Strang Cancer Prevention Center; W. Edelmann, Albert Ein-
stein College of Medicine; R. Kucherlapati, Harvard Medical
School; and M. Lipkin, Strang Cancer Prevention Center;
unpublished results), a mouse group that was fed the NWD
supplemented with calcium and vitamin D was also included.
After 2 y on the NWD, mice developed a signiﬁcant number
of colon and small intestinal tumors (both adenomas and
adenocarcinomas), which was not seen when the NWD was
supplemented with calcium and vitamin D (K. Yang and M.
Lipkin, Strang Cancer Prevention Center; unpublished re-
sults). The incidence and the number of colon tumors, kinetics
of tumor development (i.e., at about 80% of the life span of
the organism), and dependence of tumor formation on major
risk factors for colon cancer in the Western diet are all
remarkably similar to the development of sporadic colon can-
cer in the human population.

In the same experiment, mice from each dietary group were
euthanized at 3 mo for analysis of molecular changes in colon
epithelial cells that might predispose the animals for develop-
ment of pathological changes at the later time points. This
time point was chosen because it was sufﬁcient for the diets to
have inﬂuenced metabolism and physiology that establish a
relative risk for tumor development but early enough so that
small tumors and microadenomas that presage tumor develop-
ment at 18 –24 mo would not yet be a complicating factor in
analysis.

In comparing colonic RNA from animals maintained on
the NWD to those fed the control AIN76A diet, about 15%
of 28,000 sequences were altered in expression. This altered
proﬁle of gene expression in the colon induced by the NWD
compared with the AIN76A diet was partially shifted back by
supplementation of the NWD with calcium and vitamin D
toward the proﬁle of expression seen in the control diet. In
fact, we were able to identify over 700 sequences altered in
expression by the NWD that were signiﬁcantly shifted back by
addition of calcium and vitamin D toward their expression
levels in the AIN76A fed animals. Thus, there is a subset of
sequences that closely track the levels of calcium and vitamin

D in the diet, as well as the relative risk for tumor develop-
ment.

Grouping these sequences into functionally related catego-
ries revealed signiﬁcant enrichment among sequences altered
in expression for genes involved in 36 of 133 predeﬁned
functional groups. For example, the proﬁle of expression of
genes involved in lipid metabolism was altered by the NWD,
consistent with the elevated fat content of this diet. Remark-
ably, elevation of calcium and vitamin D in the NWD par-
tially restored the pattern of expression of these genes to that
seen in the control diet, even though no change was made to
the lipid content of the diet. Thus, calcium and vitamin D
appear to normalize the metabolic proﬁle of the cells with
regard to lipid metabolism. There were also extensive changes
in expression of genes associated with calcium homeostasis,
again consistent with the differences in calcium levels in the
different diets.

One of the most interesting set of changes involved genes
involved in Wnt signaling, the pathway that is at the center of
initiating colon tumor formation in both the human and in
the mouse genetic models. Wnt signaling is a developmental
pathway that, when activated in the intestinal tract, favors the
dissociation of ␤-catenin from E-cadherin in the membrane
and therefore the association of ␤-catenin with Tcf4, a mem-
ber of a family of transcription factors (11,12). This forms an
active transcription complex that initiates a program of altered
gene expression. This program has been shown to be associ-
ated with the regulation of genes involved in cell cycling, such
as c-myc and cyclin D1, as well as cell differentiation (13–15).
In fact, it has been demonstrated that Wnt signaling maintains
cells in a “crypt progenitor” like phenotype (14) and that in
the constitutive absence of this signaling, when cells are forced
to express a dominant-negative Tcf4 or in mice with a targeted
inactivation of Tcf4, the stem-cell population differentiates,
and the mucosa degenerates (16).

In colon cancer, ␤-catenin-Tcf signaling becomes consti-
tutive. A key regulatory element in the Wnt pathway is the
APC gene product. This protein forms a complex with ␤-cate-
nin, axin, and GSK3␤to target ␤-catenin for phosphorylation,
and subsequent ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation
(11,15,17). Thus, ␤-catenin-Tcf signaling is regulated in part
by the APC gene product. In the development of colon
cancer, APC (or less frequently, ␤-catenin itself) is mutated,
either in the germ line or somatically, and this regulatory step
is therefore abrogated (11,15,17). Thus, ␤-catenin-Tcf signal-
ing becomes constitutively activated, leading to cell cycling
and persistence of cells in a crypt progenitor-like phenotype
(i.e., undifferentiated or partially differentiated), and eventu-
ally, causing tumor formation.

When mice were fed the NWD, there was an elevation of
expression of ␤-catenin gene expression. Thus, cells may have
been driven toward a more proliferative, less differentiated
state. However, when mice were fed the NWD diet supple-
mented with calcium and vitamin D, the level of expression of
the ␤-catenin gene decreased, reestablishing a measure of
regulation of the pathway. Further, when mice were fed the
NWD, there was increased expression of genes that encode
receptors for Wnt signals, which decreased when the NWD
was supplemented by calcium and vitamin D. Therefore, there
may be subtle changes in how the pathway responds to Wnt
ligands and hence in homeostasis of the intestinal mucosa. In
summary, diet appeared to modulate the key pathway that
leads to colon tumor formation. Moreover, this could be re-
lated to extensive changes in both the redox and the cytoskel-
eton functional groups. It has recently been demonstrated that
␤-catenin also regulates an oxidative stress pathway, which

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/11/2710/4669904
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

DIETARY COMPONENTS AND GENE EXPRESSION

2713

results in decreased cell proliferation (18,19). Therefore,
␤-catenin regulated pathways may interact as positive and
negative modulators of cell cycling to maintain homeostasis of
the intestinal mucosa. As is clear from the development of
tumors in animals maintained on the Western-style diet [in-
terestingly, originally termed a “stress diet” by Newmark and
Lipkin (3,7)], this drive to maintain homeostasis eventually
fails, at least in some crypts, perhaps because of an imbalance
in these pathways generated by the complexity of changes in
both Wnt signaling and in redox functions. This may be
reﬂected in alterations in expression of genes involved in
cell-cycle progression. Finally, extensive changes in genes that
encode proteins linked to cytoskeleton structure and function
could also stem from the alterations in Wnt signaling, because
their normal binding partners in the membrane, the cadherins,
connect to the cytoskeleton (20). This may be of signiﬁcance
in neoplastic transformation because cell shape changes may
affect cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions and signaling, and
such changes in the cytoskeletal network have long been
recognized as a hallmark of cancer.

Pathways of maturation in the intestinal tract

As discussed above, dietary modulation of the probability of
tumor development would be expected to affect pathways that
govern normal cell maturation. These would include pathways
that regulate and coordinate cell proliferation, cell migration,
apoptosis/anoikis, and lineage-speciﬁc differentiation. There is
certainly much information available regarding the role of key
molecules in these maturation pathways, both in general and
speciﬁcally for intestinal epithelial cells. To expand our
knowledge of how cells mature during their migration from the
crypt to the lumen, we have adapted the Weiser technique
(21,22) to the mouse to fractionate cells according to their
position within this continuum. This method involves pro-
gressive dissociation of cells from the small intestine, begin-
ning from the top of the villus (fraction 1) and proceeding
down to the crypt (fraction 10). We have validated the frac-
tionation in several ways (23): the expression of differentia-
tion markers, such as villin and alkaline phosphatase, increase
as a gradient from fraction 10 (bottom) to fraction 1 (top), and
PCNA, a marker of proliferating cells, decreases along this
axis, and is undetectable by approximately fraction 5. We have
also done gene expression proﬁling of these fractions. This
further validated the fractionation, as other differentiation
markers also increased as cells migrated upward, and there was
a good relation between sequences that changed in expression
as cells migrated up from the crypt and sequences we had
previously identiﬁed during the cell-cycle arrest and differen-
tiation along the absorptive cell lineage of Caco2 cells in
culture (24). Moreover, several sequences characteristically
expressed in Paneth cells, which migrate down into the crypt
base, were maximally expressed in the crypt fractions, as were
a large number of cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases, which
drive the cells through the cell cycle. We have now compared
the database of sequences altered in expression by the NWD
diet to other gene expression databases we have generated
(www.augenlichtlab.com). We found that a signiﬁcant per-
centage of sequences altered in expression by diet are se-
quences that also change in expression during migration of the
cells along the crypt-lumen axis (G. Corner and L. Augen-
licht, Albert Einstein Cancer Center; unpublished results).
This is further evidence that the diets are likely altering
homeostasis in the intestinal mucosa, at the molecular as well
as the cellular level.

A key role of c-myc and p21WAF1/cip1

A particularly interesting pathway that governs cell matu-
ration and which is regulated by Wnt signaling, encompasses
the c-myc and the p21WAF1/cip1 gene, a cyclin-dependent ki-
nase inhibitor. As discussed, c-myc is a target of ␤-catenin-
Tcf4 transcriptional regulation (25), and, in the lower portion
of the crypt where ␤-catenin-Tcf4 signaling is highest, expres-
sion of c-myc is also high. Moreover, we have shown that
c-myc decreases as cells migrate up the crypt, and coincident
with this is an altered regulation of a large number of genes
that have been shown to be c-myc targets (23). Thus, we
believe that c-myc is a major element in stimulating the
cascade of events that govern normal intestinal cell matura-
tion. Further, p21 is one of the important genes that c-myc
regulates in this cascade. The expression of p21 is repressed by
c-myc forming a complex with a positive regulator of p21,
Miz-1. Upon decreased expression of c-myc, Miz-1 becomes
free to bind to and activate the promoter of p21, thus elevating
p21 expression (14). In investigating the relative levels of
c-myc and p21 mRNA expression along the crypt-lumen axis,
we found that c-myc progressively decreases from fraction 10
(crypt) to fraction 1 (top), while p21 levels are not elevated
until the cells clearly exit the crypt (23). Thus, the ratio of p21
to c-myc mRNA increases “stepwise” along this axis: due to
the drop in c-myc, the p21/c-myc ratio is elevated as cells
migrate up the crypt. This plateaus immediately until cells are
in the villus. Then, as p21 is elevated, there is a further
increase in the p21/c-myc ratio nearer the top of the crypt.

This pattern needs to be conﬁrmed at the protein level and
by more careful positioning of the changes along the crypt-
villus axis. However, it may indicate an integration of the cell
maturation inducing affects of c-myc and p21 along this axis,
coordinated by the stoichiometry of the components. This
may be critical, because, as discussed above, inactivation of
p21 can increase tumor formation initiated by inactivation of
Apc. Interestingly, the fact that inactivation of p21 is not
sufﬁcient for tumor formation [i.e., in the intestine, inactiva-
tion of p21 also required a mutation of Apc for tumor forma-
tion (8)] may be because p21 is not normally expressed in
either the stem-cell or the transit-cell population in the crypt
but only as cells have migrated into the villus. In this context,
it is interesting to note that we have recently detected that for
the cdki p27, there may be higher expression in the crypt
where it complexes with cdks (H. Smartt and L. Augenlicht,
Albert Einstein Cancer Center; unpublished results). This
raises the hypothesis that p27 in proliferating crypt cells,
functions, at least in part, to restrain cycling cells from un-
controlled growth. Thus, it would then be clear why targeted
inactivation of p27 is sufﬁcient to initiate tumor formation
(10).

Summary

The development of intestinal cancer, whether in well-
deﬁned, high-risk groups, in the general population or in
mouse models is highly dependent upon dietary exposures.
Although dietary factors inﬂuence the probability of tumor
formation, they may exert only subtle affects on the trillions of
cells that reside over a lifetime in the intestinal mucosa, only
a very small number of which, even in groups at higher risk,
will develop into neoplastic lesions. While pathways inﬂu-
enced by diet may produce phenotypically undetectable le-
sions at early stages of carcinogenesis, the techniques described
herein provide unique mechanistic insights into the identiﬁ-
cation of diet-related gene expression patterns associated with

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/11/2710/4669904
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

2714

SYMPOSIUM

higher risk of colorectal cancer. There is great potential to use
these models to support the biologic plausibility for dietary
prevention of colorectal cancer and for the identiﬁcation of
new or novel protective dietary factors.

LITERATURE CITED

1. Warthin AS. Heredity with reference to carcinoma. Arch Intern Med.

2. Lynch HT, Krush AJ. Cancer family G revisited: 1895–1970. Cancer.

1913;12:546 –55.

1971;27:1505–11.

3. Newmark HL, Lipkin M, Maheshwari N. Colonic hyperplasia and hyper-
proliferation induced by a nutritional stress diet with four components of Western-
style diet. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1980;82:491– 6.

4. Newmark HL. Nutrient density: an important and useful tool for laboratory

animal studies. Carcinogenesis. 1987;8:871–3.

5. Newmark HL, Lipkin M, Maheshwari N. Colonic hyperproliferation in-
duced in rats and mice by nutritional-stress diets containing four components of
a human Western-style diet (series 2). Am J Clin Nutr. 1991;54: 209S-14.

6. Newmark HL, Yang K, Lipkin M, Kopelovich L, Liu Y, Fan K, Shinozaki H.
A Western-style diet induces benign and malignant neoplasms in the colon of
normal C57Bl/6 mice. Carcinogenesis. 2001; 22:1871–5.

7. Yang K, Edelmann,W, Fan K, Lau K, Leung D, Newmark H, Kucherlapati
R, Lipkin M. Dietary modulation of carcinoma development in a mouse model for
human familial polyposis. Cancer Res. 1998;58:5713–7.

8. Yang WC, Mathew J, Velcich A, Edelmann W, Kucherlapati R, Lipkin M,
Yang K, Augenlicht LH. Targeted inactivation of the p21 WAF1/cip1 gene en-
hances Apc initiated tumor formation and the tumor promoting activity of a
Western-style high risk diet by altering cell maturation in the intestinal mucosa.
Cancer Res. 2001;61:565–9.

9. Philipp-Staheli J, Kim KH, Payne SR, Gurley KE, Liggitt D, Longton G,
Kemp CJ. Pathway-speciﬁc tumor suppression: reduction of p27 accelerates
gastrointestinal tumorigenesis in Apc mutant mice, but not in Smad3 mutant
mice. Cancer Cell. 2002;1:355– 68.

10. Yang W, Bancroft L, Nicholas C, Lozonschi I, Augenlicht LH. Targeted
inactivation of p27kip1 is sufﬁcient for large and small intestinal tumorigenesis in
the mouse, which can be augmented by a Western-style high-risk diet. Cancer
Res. 2003;63:4990 – 6.

11. van Es JH, Giles RH, Clevers HC. The many faces of the tumor suppres-

sor gene APC. Exp Cell Res. 2001;264:126 –34.

12. Sancho E, Batlle E, Clevers H. Live and let die in the intestinal epithelium.

Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2003;15:763–70.

13. Mariadason JM, Bordonaro M, Aslam F, Shi L, Kuraguchi M, Velcich A,
Augenlicht LH. Down-regulation of B-catenin-TCF signaling is linked to colonic
epithelial cell differentiation. Cancer Res. 2001;61:3465–71.

14. van de Wetering M, Sancho E, Verweij C, de Lau W, Oving I, Hurlstone A,
van der Horn K, Batle E, Coudreuse D. The b-catenin/TCF-4 complex imposes a
crypt progenitor phenotype on colorectal cancer cells. Cell. 2002;111:241–50.

15. Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Cancer genes and the pathways they control.

Nat Med. 2004;10:789 –99.

16. Korinek V, Barker N, Moerer P, van Donselaar E, Huls G, Peters PJ,
Clevers H. Depletion of epithelial stem-cell compartments in the small intestine of
mice lacking Tcf-4. Nat Genet. 1998;19:379 – 83.

17. Fodde R. The multiple functions of tumour suppressors: its all in APC. Nat

Cell Biol. 2003;5:190 –2.

18. Essers MAG, de Vries-Smits LMM, Barker N, Polderman P, Burgering
interaction between b-catenin and FOXO in

BMT, Korswagen H. Functional
oxidative stress signaling. Science. 2005;308:1181– 4.

19. Bowerman B. Oxidative stress and cancer: a b-catenin convergence.

Science. 2005;308:1119 –20.

20. Takeichi M. Cadherin cell adhesion receptors as a morphogenetic regu-

lator. Science. 1991;251:1451–5.

21. Weiser M. Intestinal epithelial cell surface membrane glycoprotein syn-
thesis. I. An indicator of cellular differentiation. J Biol Chem. 1973;248:2536 – 41.
22. Weiser M. Intestinal epithelial cell surface membrane glycoprotein syn-
thesis. II. Glycosyltransferases and endogenous acceptors of the undifferentiated
cell surface membrane. J Biol Chem. 1973;248:2542– 8.

23. Mariadason JM, Nicholas C, L’Italien KE, Zhuang M, Smartt HJ, Heerdt
BG, Yang W, Corner GA, Wilson AJ, et al. Gene expression proﬁling of intestinal
epithelial cell maturation along the crypt-villus axis. Gastroenterology. 2005;128:
1081– 8.

24. Mariadason JM, Arango D, Corner GA, Aranes MJ, Hotchkiss KA, Yang
WC, Augenlicht LH. A gene expression proﬁle that deﬁnes colon cell maturation
in vitro. Cancer Res. 2002;62:4791– 804.

25. He TC, Sparks AB, Rago C, Hermeking H, Zawel L, da Costa LT, Morin
PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Identiﬁcation of c-MYC as a target of the APC
pathway. Science. 1998;281:1509 –12.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/11/2710/4669904
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

