CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION
2017, VOL. 57, NO. 12, 2623–2635
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2015.1064086

Anticancer potential of dietary vitamin D and ascorbic acid: A review

B. V. Sunil Kumar, Satparkash Singh, and Ramneek Verma

School of Animal Biotechnology, Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Ludhiana, India

ABSTRACT
Cancers have been the leading cause of death worldwide and poor diet and physical inactivity are major
risk factors in cancer-related deaths. Micronutrients such as vitamins and minerals appear to have
preventive properties against cancer. One important mechanism by which dietary changes can exert
preventive effects on cancer is via the modulation of micronutrient concentrations in target tissues. Many
of these micronutrients are available in the form of dietary supplements, and the intake of these
supplements is prevalent in various parts of the world. However, in most cases, it is not known which
micronutrient (or combination of micronutrients) is best when it comes to lowering the risk of cancer. The
present review illustrates the effect of vitamin D and ascorbic acid intake on preventing cancer.

KEYWORDS
Cancer; dietary
supplementation; vitamin D;
ascorbic acid; anti-neoplastic

Introduction

Cancer is currently one of the most important public health
issues. World Health Organization (WHO) reported that 14%
of global deaths resulted from malignant neoplasm, and the
incidence is expected to be 18% in 2030 (Kwan et al, 2015).
Cancers are not only restricted to human beings; domestic
animals and pets are also at an equivalent risk. The frequency
of neoplasia in different species varies tremendously. Dogs are
by far the most frequently affected domestic species, with a
prevalence »3 times that in women, followed by cats and other
pets (Sunil Kumar and Kataria, 2013; Chaudhary et al., 2014).
It is nearly impossible to prove what caused a cancer in any
individual, because most cancers have multiple causes. Over
30% of cancers are potentially avoidable by reducing key risk
factors, like tobacco use and obesity, which respectively cause
about 22% and 10% of cancer deaths (Cancer fact sheet, WHO,
2014). In the developing world, nearly 20% of cancers are due
to infections such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human
papillomavirus
2014).
Approximately 5–10% of cancers are due to genetic defects
inherited from a person’s parents (Word cancer report, 2014).
Apart from genetic causes which were predominant in the
earlier times, environmental causes and changed lifestyle have
increased the incidence of cancer these days (Anand et al.,
2008). Dietary factors are among the most
important
environmental factors implicated in most of the cancers. It has
been estimated that around 10–70% of all cancers are
attributable to diet and that up to 90% of colorectal cancer may
be avoidable through alterations in the diet and life style
(Bishayee et al., 2015). Although treatments like surgery,
chemotherapy, radiation therapy are available; cancer is rela-
tively incurable till date and may even relapse after treatment.

sheet, WHO,

(Cancer

fact

Early detection of neoplasmic growths can save lives, but
cancer is often detected as late end point of carcinogenesis, so,
its early diagnosis is very poor (Sunil Kumar, et al., 2013a).
Hence, best defense against cancer is prevention. Certain types
of cancer, caused by viruses can be prevented by prophylaxis,
however, the efﬁcacy of anti-tumor vaccines is plausible. The
evidence linking poor nutrition, overweight/obesity, and
physical
inactivity as risk factors for cancer continues to
develop and a healthy diet is one of the most important lifestyle
changes that a person can make to reduce his/her risk of cancer
(Beaglehole et al., 2011; Kushi et al., 2012). WHO has graded
the strength of the evidence for these lifestyle risk factors, in
relation to a range of cancers, and estimated that around
1 million new cases could be prevented in the USA, UK, China,
and Brazil alone, by merely correcting lifestyle behavior.
Reducing the risk of certain cancers may be possible through
the usage of dietary supplements, which could be used alone or
in combination with conventional chemotherapeutic agents, in
order to prevent new cases of cancer (Visioli et al., 2005;
Pelucchi et al., 2009).

Dietary supplements include vitamins, minerals, herbs, or
products made from plants. They can also be made from
animal parts, algae, seafood, yeasts, fungus, and many other
food substances or extracts. They also include powdered amino
acids, enzymes, energy bars, and liquid food supplements. Used
properly, certain dietary supplements may help in reducing the
risk of some diseases and discomfort caused by certain drugs or
conditions. And most people can use dietary supplements
safely within certain dosage guidelines.

A number of epidemiologic studies have investigated
whether people with higher vitamin intakes or higher blood
levels of certain vitamins have lower risks of speciﬁc cancers.

CONTACT B. V. Sunil Kumar, Assistant Biochemist
nary and Animal Sciences University, Ludhiana 141004, India.
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/bfsn.
© 2017 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

drbvskumar@gmail.com; sunilkumar@gadvasu.in

School of Animal Biotechnology, Guru Angad Dev Veteri-

2624

B. V. SUNIL KUMAR ET AL.

The cancers for which the most human data are available are
colorectal, breast, prostate, and pancreatic cancer. Numerous
epidemiologic studies have shown that higher intake or blood
levels of vitamin D are associated with a reduced risk of colo-
rectal cancer. Experimental evidence has also suggested a possi-
ble association between vitamin D and cancer risk. In studies of
cancer cells and of tumors in mice, vitamin D has been found
to have several roles that might slow or prevent the develop-
ment of cancer, including promoting cellular differentiation,
decreasing cancer cell growth/proliferation, stimulating cell
death (apoptosis), and reducing tumor blood vessel formation
(angiogenesis) (Gandini et al., 2011; Ma et al., 2011). Ascorbic
acid (Vitamin C) exhibits antioxidant actions including the
neutralization of free radicals (Sunil Kumar et al., 2010) which
may impact cancer progression. At higher doses it may also act
as a pro-oxidant as in vitro experiments have demonstrated
cytotoxicity to cancer cells without similar effects on normal
cells (Harris et al., 2014).

In this paper, we critically review the effectiveness of dietary
micronutrients especially vitamin D and ascorbic acid in reduc-
ing cancer risks. The anticancer mechanisms of these dietary
vitamins are also discussed.

Vitamin D and its fortiﬁcation in foods

Vitamin D is a group of fat-soluble micronutrients that also act
as pro-hormone. It helps in deposition of calcium and phos-
phorus in bones and teeth. Vitamin D is synthesized within the
body on exposure to sunlight. However, it can also be obtained
from certain foods (Table 1). Dietary sources include a few
foods that naturally contain vitamin D, such as fatty ﬁsh, ﬁsh
liver oil, and eggs. However, most dietary vitamin D comes
from foods fortiﬁed with vitamin D, such as milk, juices, and
breakfast cereals. The Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) at the
Institute of Medicine of The National Academies (formerly
National Academy of Sciences) has recommended daily intakes
of vitamin D, assuming minimal Sun exposure (Table 2).
Vitamin D deﬁciency leads to rickets in children and osteoma-
lacia in adults which are characterized by weak bones and
cartilages. Vitamin D exists in two major forms, vitamin D2

(ergocalciferol) and vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol). Vitamin D2 is
made naturally by plants, and vitamin D3 is synthesized by the
body when exposed to sunlight. Both forms are converted to
25-hydroxycholecalciferol in the liver which is further modiﬁed
to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol), the active form of
vitamin D in the body (Norman, 1998).

Excessive intake of any nutrient can cause toxic effects and
vitamin D is no exception. Too much vitamin D can be harmful
because it increases calcium levels, which can lead to calcinosis
(the deposit of calcium salts in soft tissues, such as the kidneys,
heart, or lungs) and hypercalcemia. The safe upper intake level of
vitamin D for adults and children older than 8 years of age is
100 mg per day (4000 IU per day). Toxicity from too much
vitamin D is more likely to occur from high intakes of dietary
supplements. Excessive Sun exposure does not cause vitamin D
toxicity. However, the Institute of Medicine (IOM), Food and
Nutrition Board states that people should not try to increase vita-
min D production by increasing their exposure to sunlight because
this will also increase their risk of skin cancer (Otten et al., 2006).

Sun exposure is the major requisite for vitamin D synthesis.
Despite plentiful sunshine, vitamin D deﬁciency prevails in
tropical countries like India due to several socioeconomic and
cultural constraints (Ritu and Gupta, 2014). Fortiﬁcation of
widely consumed staple foods with vitamin D offers one of the
simplest and most practical methods to combat its deﬁciencies
for both poor and wealthy societies. General principles for the
addition of essential nutrients to foods are given by the Codex
Alimentarius Commission. The Codex deﬁnition of fortiﬁca-
tion is “the addition of one or more essential nutrients to a
food whether or not it is normally contained in the food, for
the purpose of preventing or correcting a demonstrated
deﬁciency of one or more nutrients in the population or speciﬁc
population groups.” The advantages of fortiﬁcation include
greater speciﬁcity of intervention and better dose adjustment.
However, there are limitations of this strategy as well such as
more cost, low compliance, self-prescription and increased risk
of toxicity. Several foods may be fortiﬁed with vitamin D in
tropical countries like India, e.g., milk, yogurt, infant formulas,
ghee, soy milk, sugar, etc. Some of the vitamin D fortiﬁed foods
are discussed as follows.

Table 1. Selected Food Sources of Vitamin D (U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2011).

S. No.

Food

International Units per serving


Percent Daily values

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

Cod liver oil, 1 tablespoon
Swordﬁsh, cooked, 3 ounces
Salmon (sockeye), cooked, 3 ounces
Tuna ﬁsh, canned in water, drained, 3 ounces
Orange juice fortiﬁed with vitamin D, 1 cup (check product labels,

as amount of added vitamin D varies)

Milk, nonfat, reduced fat, and whole, vitamin D-fortiﬁed, 1 cup
Yogurt, fortiﬁed with 20% of the DV for vitamin D, 6 ounces
Margarine, fortiﬁed, 1 tablespoon
Sardines, canned in oil, drained, 2 sardines
Liver, beef, cooked, 3 ounces
Egg, 1 large (vitamin D is found in yolk)
Ready-to-eat cereal, fortiﬁed with 10% of the DV for vitamin D,

0.75-1 cup (more heavily fortiﬁed cereals might provide more
of the DV)

Cheese, Swiss, 1 ounce

1,360
566
447
154
137

115-124
80
60
46
42
41
40

6

340
142
112
39
34

29-31
20
15
12
11
10
10

2



Notes:

DVs were developed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to help consumers compare the nutrient contents among products within the context of a total

daily diet. The DV for vitamin D is currently set at 400 IU for adults and children age 4 and older.

CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION

2625

Table 2. Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Vitamin D (Institute of
Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board, 2010).

Age

Male

Female

Pregnancy

Lactation

400 IU (10 mg) 400 IU (10 mg)
Below 1 year
1–13 years
600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg)
14–18 years
600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg)
19–50 years
600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg)
51–70 years
600 IU (15 mg) 600 IU (15 mg)
Above 70 years 800 IU (20 mg) 800 IU (20 mg)



as well except that, in this case rice-shaped simulated kernels
are produced by passing the dough through a simple pasta
C. Coating combines the for-
press at a temperature below 70
tiﬁcant mix with ingredients such as waxes and gums. The mix-
ture is sprayed over the surface of grain kernels in several layers
to form the rice-premix and then is blended with polished rice.
Dusting involves sprinkling the polished rice grains with the
powder form of the micronutrient premix (Alavi et al., 2008).

Notes:

The biological activity of 40 International units (IU) of vitamin D is equal to



1 mg (microgram).

Vitamin D fortiﬁed milk
Milk and milk products are preferred vehicles to fortify with
vitamin D all over the world. Prior to fortiﬁcation of milk with
this fat-soluble vitamin, homogenization should be done to
achieve a uniform distribution of added vitamin D throughout.
India is the largest producer of milk in the world. Fortiﬁcation
of milk with vitamin D could aid in correcting vitamin D deﬁ-
ciency in Indian population. However, major hindrances to its
proper use are milk adulteration and high prevalence of lactose
intolerance in the tropical population (Ritu and Gupta, 2014).

Vitamin D cereal ﬂour
Bread made up of ﬂour is one of the staple foods consumed all
over the world. Various cereals may be used to make ﬂours viz.
wheat, corn, millet, sorghum/milo, barley etc. Fortiﬁcation of
ﬂour with vitamin D is a very viable fortiﬁcation vehicle.
Promising results have been obtained regarding technological
feasibility and bioavailability of vitamin D in fortiﬁed wheat
ﬂour (Natri et al., 2006; Mocanu et al., 2009; Madsen et al.,
2013). Notably, bread fortiﬁed with 5000 IU of vitamin D3 per
daily serving consumed by sun-deprived nursing home resi-
dents in Romania demonstrated both the efﬁcacy and safety of
wheat ﬂour fortiﬁcation. Fortiﬁcation of bread resulted in
higher serum concentrations of vitamin D (>30 ng/mL) and
signiﬁcantly increased bone density (Mocanu et al., 2009).

Vitamin D fortiﬁed reﬁned ﬂour
Reﬁned wheat ﬂour is widely used in bakeries for the
manufacturing of cakes, pastries, biscuits, etc. Its fortiﬁcation
may have a signiﬁcant contribution in the improvement of the
vitamin D status of the general population. However, most of
the vitamin losses occur during baking at temperatures over
200
C. But the temperature inside the product is signiﬁcantly
lower, so the thermal degradation of vitamin D would be within
an acceptable range (Ritu and Gupta, 2014).



Vitamin D fortiﬁed rice
Rice is the most widely consumed staple food in the tropical
world. Important fortiﬁcation strategies in rice include hot and
cold extrusion, coating and dusting (Alavi et al., 2008). In hot
extrusion technique, dough made of rice ﬂour, a fortiﬁcant
mix, and water is passed through an extruder where it is cut
into grain-like structures that resemble rice kernels. This pro-

cess involves relatively high temperatures (70–110
C). It results
in fully or partially pre-cooked simulated rice kernels that have
similar appearance (sheen and transparency) as regular rice
kernels. Similar steps are followed in cold extrusion technique

Vitamin D fortiﬁed cooking oils and spreads like butter
and ghee
Fats, margarine, and cooking oils are attractive fortiﬁcation
vehicles for vitamin D all over the world owing its fat soluble
nature (Calvo et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2013). Fortiﬁcation of
margarine with vitamin D is mandatory in Canada and
optional in the USA (Calvo et al., 2013). Cooking oils are not
fortiﬁed in the USA and Canada (Calvo et al., 2004). However,
frying consumables in vitamin D fortiﬁed fats may result in
loss of about 50% of vitamin D (Lu et al., 2007) so cooking with
very little oil
i.e., baking or broiling (oil-free)
instead of frying (shallow or deep). However, overconsumption
of these products may exacerbate other health issues related to
metabolic syndrome.

is advisable,

Anti-cancer effect of vitamin D

Vitamin D not only regulates calcium and phosphate metabo-
lism, but its antimitotic and cell differentiation effects have also
been recently documented. It can inhibit cell-proliferation,
neo-angiogenesis and metastatic potential in cancerous tissue.
Vitamin D deﬁciency has also been associated with higher
aggressiveness of tumor and poor prognosis. Although clinical
studies showing beneﬁt of vitamin D supplementation on
cancer outcome are absent, clear
recommendations are
currently available for treatment of vitamin D deﬁciency during
anti-cancer therapy. Owing to the high prevalence of vitamin D
insufﬁciency in cancer patients and signiﬁcant risks of its
further decrease after antitumor therapy,
it should become
standard of care to examine 25- hydroxyl cholecalciferol serum
levels and correct vitamin D insufﬁciency in cancer patients
(Tomiska et al., 2015). Calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D,
is known to inhibit the proliferation and invasiveness of many
types of cancer cells,
including breast, colon, pancreatic,
prostate, and liver cancer cells. Several vitamin D analogues
that are less calcemic but exhibit more potent anti-tumor
activity have also been recommended as good candidates for
anti-cancer therapy (Matsumoto et al., 2015).

Many studies have revealed a link between vitamin D and
breast cancer as well. Women with breast cancer tend to have
low levels of vitamin D in their body. Studies reveal that
maintaining an optimal 25 hydroxy cholecalciferol status at
diagnosis and during the one-year
follow-up period is
important for improving breast cancer patient survival (Lim
et al., 2015). Vitamin D receptors in breast tissue, upon binding
with vitamin D, triggers apoptosis in cancerous cells and
prevent metastasis (Rose et al., 2013). However, the relationship
between breast cancer and vitamin D is complex, not fully
understood, and is still being studied (Wang et al., 2013). Some
studies found that women with low levels of vitamin D are

2626

B. V. SUNIL KUMAR ET AL.

more likely to develop breast cancer. A recent review of many
studies found that post-menopausal women with low levels of
vitamin D had a higher risk of getting breast cancer compared
to post-menopausal women with high levels of vitamin D
(Bauer et al., 2013). In a dose–response relationship study, it
has been found that increased vitamin D levels in the body
decreases breast cancer risk (Bauer et al., 2013).

However, most prevention studies on vitamin D and cancer
have been observational. No studies have been undertaken for
treating cancer patients with vitamin D. Some studies have
shown that there is a link between vitamin D levels and
recurrence of breast cancer, tumor size, and death from breast
cancer. Studies indicate that women with breast cancer who
had low vitamin D levels had a more than doubled risk of
cancer relapse and an almost doubled risk of death compared
to women with high vitamin D levels.

There is a growing amount of observational research that
shows a protective anti-cancer effect of vitamin D (Goodwin
et al., 2009; Rose et al., 2013). A study was conducted in USA
on a large group of women who received calcium (1,000 mg)
plus vitamin D (400 IU) supplement or a dummy pill for
7 years. After almost 5 years of supplementation, women who
were in the calcium plus vitamin D group had an 18% lower
risk of developing early stage breast cancer (Cauley et al.,
2013). In a different experiment, a vitamin D (1,000 IU) plus
calcium (1,400–1,500 mg) supplementation was found to
reduce the incidence of any kind of cancer after 4 years of
supplementation (Chlebowski et al., 2008)

Another study found that post-menopausal women with
higher vitamin D levels had a 12% lower chance of developing
breast cancer than post-menopausal women with low vitamin
D levels. However, a threshold effect was observed with no
additional decrease in breast cancer risk when the women had
vitamin D levels above 35 ng/mL (Bauer et al., 2013).

Molecular mechanisms underlying anti-cancer effect
of vitamin D

).

It

Calcitriol has emerged in recent years as a promising agent with
anti-cancer properties (Feldman et al., 1995; Miller, 1998;
Konety and Getzenberg, 2002; Krishnan et al., 2005; Moreno
et al., 2005;
is an important regulator of calcium
homeostasis and bone metabolism through its actions in
intestine, bone, kidney, and the parathyroid glands (Moreno
et al., 2005). In addition to these classical actions, calcitriol also
exerts anti-proliferative and pro-differentiating effects in a
number of tumors and malignant cells raising the possibility of
its use as an anti-cancer agent. The effects of this fat-soluble
vitamin are varied, appear to be cell-speciﬁc, and result in
growth arrest and stimulation of apoptosis (Fig. 1).

Effect of vitamin D on cell proliferation and apoptosis
Regulation of the cell cycle is mediated by a complex network
of interlinked regulators that govern cellular proliferation in an
orchestral
fashion. These regulators include proteins like
cyclins and their association with enzymes known as cyclin
dependent kinases (CDKs) and CDK inhibitors (CKIs). Tumor
progression occurs when the rate of cell proliferation exceeds
that of cell death. Cell death can occur either by necrosis (the

Figure 1. Anti-cancer effect of vitamin D.

result of tissue insult or injury), or active cell death (apoptosis),
an energy-dependent process in which a distinct series of
biochemical and molecular events lead to the death of cells by
speciﬁc signals (Wyllie, 1987). The signiﬁcance of apoptosis in
cancer research is emphasized by the recognition that many
chemotherapeutic agents induce tumor regression through
their ability to activate apoptosis.

Cell-cycle perturbation is central to calcitriol-mediated anti-
proliferative activity in tumour cells. Vitamin D may exert
growth inhibitory effects through repression of different key
molecules involved in cell-cycle regulation. Calcitriol treatment
of human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 was found to repress
c-Myc, a known proto-oncogene in the cell-cycle regulatory
machinery (Jensen et al., 2001). Calcitriol can also suppress
expression of few oncogenes thereby increasing expression of
their antagonists in the signaling pathway (Washington et al.,
2011; Meyer et al., 2012; Salehi-Tabar et al., 2012). When
ovarian cancer cells were treated with calcitriol, cell cycle was
found to be arrested in G(1) phase through down-regulation of
cyclin E/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (Li et al., 2004). Collectively,
these studies conﬁrm that active form of vitamin D can
suppress cell proliferation through inhibitory effects on several
regulators in the network of cell-cycle control machinery.

In addition to the anti-proliferative effects of vitamin D3,
there is increasing evidence of
its anti-tumour effects by
regulating key mediators of apoptosis, such as repressing the
expression of the anti-apoptotic proteins BCL2 and BCL-XL, or
inducing the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins (such as
BAX, BAK and BAD) (Deeb et al., 2007). Vitamin D treatment
has also been found to induce p53 independent apoptosis in
vitro, It also increases levels of the pro-apoptotic protein, Bak
(a member of the BCl-2 gene family), in many cell lines. In rat
glioma cell lines, vitamin D treatment induced apoptosis via
DNA fragmentation and upregulation of p53 genes (Baudet
et al., 1996). In prostate cancer cell lines, vitamin D treatment
inhibited cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity and induced G0/
G1 cell cycle arrest (Bao et al., 2004). Therefore, several lines of
evidence from in vitro studies support the role of vitamin D in
promoting cell-cycle arrest and promoting apoptosis
in
malignant transformed cells.

Effect of vitamin D on oxidative stress and angiogenesis
Tumor progression is often accompanied with changes in the
normal physiology of
including production of

the cells

free-radicals that may induce oxidative stress in vivo. Oxidative
stress can induce DNA damage and loss of DNA-repair ability
(Valko et al., 2007). Vitamin D activates cellular signaling
cascades that reduce thioredoxin and promote antioxidant
responses, induce mRNA expression of superoxide dismutase
and downregulates glutathione levels by increasing glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase expression (Bao et al., 2008; Fleet
et al., 2012).

Neo-angiogenesis is a requisite for survival of cells in tumor
micro-environment, as the growing tumor mass requires more
oxygen supply. Cancer progression often induces hypoxia
which in turn promotes hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1)-
dependent angiogenesis essential
for tumor growth (Losso
et al., 2005). Vitamin D3 has been found to inhibit cellular neo-
angiogenesis in several cancer cell
lines. Upon addition of
vitamin D3 to the androgen-insensitive prostate cancer cell
line, their proliferation both in normoxia and in hypoxic
environments (that resemble those in cancer tissues) was found
to decrease. Vitamin D3 has also been found to inhibit
secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in
breast cancer cell
line. Furthermore, vitamin D treatment
downregulates endothelin 1 (ET-1) and glucose transporter 1
(Glut-1) that are essential
for inducing angiogenesis. This
molecular effect is mediated via signiﬁcant downregulation of
HIF-1 transcription and translation (Ben-Shoshan et al., 2007).

Vitamin D receptor and cancer
Besides its other physiological roles, vitamin D acts in an
intracrine or autocrine manner and stimulates the transcription
of multiple genes involved in cellular differentiation via binding
to its receptor VDR, a nuclear transcriptional factor which
belongs to the super family of steroid/thyroid hormone
receptors,
and expressed
ubiquitously in most body tissues as well as on cancerous cells
(Townsend et al., 2005; Bertone-Johnson, 2009).

located in the

cell nucleus

It has been hypothesized that a less active VDR could be
associated with either an increased susceptibility to cancer risk
or a more aggressive disease. A decrease in VDR protein
expression, due to a functional impairment, may be inﬂuenced
by the polymorphism in the VDR gene. Thus, polymorphisms
in the VDR gene may be involved in the development and or
progression of certain kinds of tumors (Chan et al., 2000; Xu
et al., 2003; Iqbal et al., 2015; Pulito et al., 2015). It has been
previously demonstrated that VDR expression is reduced in
cancer cells (Lopes et al., 2010), which may be inﬂuenced by
polymorphisms within the gene and increase breast cancer
incidence (Tang et al., 2009).

Vitamin D catabolism and cancer
Calcitriol is synthesized from vitamin D in a highly regulated
cascade. First, vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is formed in the
skin through the action of ultraviolet irradiation. Vitamin D3
then gets converted to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol [25(OH)D3]
by liver mitochondrial and microsomal enzyme (25-hydroxy-
lases), encoded by the gene CYP27A1. 25(OH)D3 is then
converted to 1a,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol) in the kidney by
mitochondrial
gene
CYP27B1). 24-hydroxylation of 25(OH)D3 and calcitriol by
the cytochrome P450 enzyme 24-hydroxylase, to the metabolites

1a-hydroxylase

(encoded

by

the

CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION

2627

24,25(OH)2D3 and 1a,24,25(OH)2D3, respectively, is the rate-
limiting step for 25(OH)D3 and 1a,25(OH)2D3 catabolism
(Deeb et al., 2007).

Calcitriol functions in an autocrine and paracrine manner to
modulate vitamin D function and signaling.
It represses
CYP27B1 while induces CYP24A1 to produce the less active
vitamin D metabolites viz. 1a,24,25(OH)2D3 and 24,25(OH)
2D3 (Brenza and DeLuca, 2000). 1a-OHase is expressed in
tissues other than kidneys also such as colon, brain, placenta,
pancreas,
lymph nodes, and skin (Zehnder et al., 2001),
allowing non-renal synthesis of calcitriol. CYP27B1 (encoding
1a-hydroxylase) is found to be overexpressed in breast and
prostate cancers (Schwartz et al., 1998; Townsend et al. 2005).
Increased expression of CYP27B1 in cancer tissues could pro-
vide local synthesis of calcitriol. However, CYP24A1 (encoding
24-OHase) is upregulated in tumors, and may counteract calci-
triol’s anti-proliferative activity, by increasing its catabolism.

Inhibition of CYP24A1 expression and activity is essential
for cancer prevention. Chemical inhibitors with varying speci-
ﬁcity for 24-OHase render tumour cells more sensitive to the
action of calcitriol and its analogues (Peehl et al., 2002; Parise
et al. 2006). This indicates that calcitriol catabolism could mod-
ulate tumor growth in some tissues, indicating the potential for
the development of 24-OHase inhibitors as cancer preventative
and/or anticancer therapeutic agents (Deeb et al., 2007).

The above-mentioned ﬁndings support that vitamin D can
effectively be used to prevent cancer. Various epidemiological
studies indicate that inadequate levels of vitamin D are associ-
ated with an increased risk and poor prognosis of several types
of cancer. Meta-analysis and cancer-prevention trials indicate
that vitamin D supplementation can lower the incidence of
many cancers including colorectal cancer, breast and prostate
cancer. However, random studies need to be undertaken to
optimize effective dose of vitamin D to prevent cancer.

Ascorbic acid (vitamin C)

The consumption of fruit and vegetables exerts a preventive
effect toward cancer and in recent years natural dietary agents
have attracted great attention in the scientiﬁc community and
among the general public. Epidemiological and basic research
studies have shown that different components present in food
such as tomatoes, olive oil, broccoli, garlic, onions, berries, soy
bean, honey,
tea, aloe vera, grapes, rosemary, basil, chili
peppers, carrots, pomegranate, and curcuma inhibit pro-prolif-
erative signals implied in initiation and the progression of
carcinogenesis, acting on pathways implied in cell proliferation,
apoptosis and metastasis through their antioxidant, cytotoxic
and pro-apoptotic properties (Aggarwal and Shishodia, 2006;
Garavello et al., 2009; Kyle et al., 2010).

Vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid), is a water-soluble vitamin that
is naturally present
in some foods, added to others, and
available as a dietary supplement. Humans, unlike most
animals, are unable to synthesize vitamin C endogenously, so it
is an essential dietary component (Li and Schellhorn, 2007).
Ascorbic acid is required for the biosynthesis of collagen, an
essential component of connective tissue, which plays a vital
role in wound healing (Carr and Frei, 1999). Insufﬁcient
vitamin C intake causes scurvy, which is characterized by

2628

B. V. SUNIL KUMAR ET AL.

widespread connective tissue weakness, poor wound healing,
hyperkeratosis, bleeding gums, and loosening or loss of teeth
due to tissue and capillary fragility (Stephen and Utecht 2001;
Weinstein et al. 2000). Deﬁciency symptoms appear only if
vitamin C intake falls below approximately 10 mg/day for
many weeks (Wang and Still 2007). Vitamin C deﬁciency is
uncommon in developed countries but can still occur in people
with limited food variety.

Recommended intakes of ascorbic acid

Results from pharmacokinetic studies indicate that oral doses
of 1.25 g/day ascorbic acid produce mean peak plasma vitamin
C concentrations of 135 micromol/L, which are about two
times higher than those produced by consuming 200–300 mg/
day ascorbic acid from vitamin C-rich foods. Pharmacokinetic
modeling predicts that even doses as high as 3 g ascorbic acid
taken every 4 hours would produce peak plasma concentrations
of only 220 micromol/L (Padayatty et al., 2004).

Intake recommendations for vitamin C is provided in the
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) developed by the Food and
Nutrition Board (FNB) at the Institute of Medicine (IOM) of
the National Academies (Institute of Medicine, Food and
Nutrition Board, 2000). Table 3 lists the current RDAs for
vitamin C. For infants from birth to 12 months, the FNB
established an adequate intake (AI) for vitamin C that is
equivalent to the mean intake of vitamin C in healthy, breastfed
infants.

Sources of vitamin C

Food
Vitamin C is widely available in foods of both plant and animal
origin, but the best sources are fresh fruits and vegetables.
Vitamin C is found naturally in broccoli, cabbage, potatoes,
peas, red peppers, brussel sprouts, kale, cauliﬂower, cantaloupe,
strawberries, mangoes, tangerines, orange, grapefruit, lemons,
and limes (Table 4). Although it is not naturally present in
grains, it is added to some fortiﬁed breakfast cereals. However,
because vitamin C is unstable when exposed to an alkaline
environment or to oxygen,
losses may be
substantial during storage and cooking (Weinstein et al., 2000).
Steaming or microwaving may
losses.
Fortunately, many of the best food sources of vitamin C, such
as fruits and vegetables, are usually consumed raw. Consuming
ﬁve varied servings of fruits and vegetables a day can provide
more than 200 mg of vitamin C.

lessen cooking

light and heat,

Table 3. Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for Ascorbic acid (Institute of
Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board, 2000).

Pregnancy

Lactation

Dietary supplements
Supplements
typically contain ascorbic acid, which has
equivalent bioavailability to that of naturally occurring ascorbic
acid in foods, such as orange juice and broccoli (Gregory, 1993;
Bates 1997). Other forms of vitamin C supplements include
sodium ascorbate, calcium ascorbate, other mineral ascorbates,
ascorbic acid with bioﬂavonoids and combination products,
such as Ester-CÒ, which contains
calcium ascorbate,
dehydroascorbate, calcium threonate, xylonate and lyxonate
(Gregory, 1993; Bates 1997).

Ascorbate fortiﬁcation in food
Some cereals and beverages are fortiﬁed with ascorbic acid an
odorless, white, crystalline compound which is stable in its dry
form. Vitamin C is often added as a fortiﬁcant to fruit juices,
fruit-ﬂavored drinks, juice added soda waters, dry cocktails or
beverages, cereal-based products, and milk. Some juices like
apple and grapes that are not normally a source of vitamin C
have vitamin C added to them. Most ready-to-eat cereals are
also fortiﬁed with vitamin C. There are technologies available
for vitamin C fortiﬁcation of fruit juices, fruit juice drinks,
other related beverages, dairy products, and some breakfast
cereals. For mixing with dry products, particle size and density
are of course important considerations. A fat-coated form of
ascorbic acid is also available for enrichment purposes. High
moisture content (greater than 7%) in the presence of oxygen is
known to adversely affect the stability of vitamin C in cereals.
Due to its high water solubility, losses due to leaching can be a
problem in some processing procedures. In dehydrated citrus
juices, the degradation is dependent on both temperature and
water activity. There is a need to develop more stable vitamin C
compounds and evaluate their use in the fortiﬁcation of a range
of vehicles.

Since milk is low in iron and vitamin C content,

it is
desirable to fortify milk with them. Milk composition has been
found to be improved with the addition of vitamin C, iron, and
zinc (L€oker et al., 2003). Sharma (2005) studied the stability of
milk with microencapsulated vitamin C and found that the
addition of vitamin C @ 30 mg/100 g was appropriate for
fortiﬁcation, because the acidity of milk did not
increase
noticeably and no negative effect on sensory quality was
observed. In a study evaluating the stability of several forms of
vitamin C during production and storage of white pan bread,
the bread fortiﬁed with large crystals of ascorbic acid exhibited
a higher retention of ascorbic acid by 20% than the bread
fortiﬁed with small crystals of ascorbic acid or with uncoated
ascorbic acid (Park et al., 1994). General loss in vitamin C
content during production of
is
approximately 37% (Steele, 1976). Studies have shown that
encapsulation is the best way of protecting vitamin C. For the
application in solid food systems (cereals, bread, and biscuits),
spray-cooling, spray-chilling, and ﬂuidized bed appear to be
the best form of encapsulation while in liquid food systems,
liposomes represent the best way (De Zarn, 1995).

ready-to-eat

cereals

Age

0–6 months
7–12 months
1–3 years
4–8 years
9–13 years
14–18 years
19 years and above

Male


40 mg

50 mg
15 mg
25 mg
45 mg
75 mg
90 mg

Female



40 mg
50 mg
15 mg
25 mg
45 mg
65 mg
75 mg



Notes:

Adequate Intake (AI).

80 mg
85 mg

115 mg
120 mg

Role of vitamin C in cancer prevention

Metastatic cells proliferate rapidly; therefore, they constantly
require more energy to cope up with increased metabolism.

Table 4. Selected Food Sources of vitamin C (U.S. Department of Agricultutre, 2011).

S. No.

Food

Milligrams (mg) per serving


Percent Daily values

CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION

2629

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

2 cup

Red pepper, sweet, raw, 1=
Orange juice, 3/4 cup
Orange, 1 medium
Grapefruit juice, 3/4 cup
Kiwifruit, 1 medium
Green pepper, sweet, raw, 1=
Broccoli, cooked, 1=
Strawberries, fresh, sliced, 1=
Brussels sprouts, cooked, 1=
Grapefruit, 1=
Tomato juice, 3/4 cup
Cabbage, cooked, 1=
2 cup
Cauliﬂower, raw, 1=
2 cup
Potato, baked, 1 medium
Tomato, raw, 1 medium

2 medium

2 cup

2 cup

2 cup
2 cup

95
93
70
70
64
60
51
49
48
39
33
28
26
17
17

158
155
117
117
107
100
85
82
80
65
55
47
43
28
28

Notes:



DV D Daily Value. DVs were developed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to help consumers compare the nutrient contents of products within the
context of a total diet. The DV for vitamin C is 60 mg for adults and children aged 4 and older. The FDA requires all food labels to list the percent DV for vitamin C. Foods
providing 20% or more of the DV are considered to be high sources of a nutrient.

During this course, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are exces-
sively generated and lead to lipid peroxidation, DNA damage
and consequently, apoptosis in cells (Azad et al 2010; Scatena
2012). Hence, oxidative stress is a major apoptotic stimulus in
cancer cells. However, by contrast, inhibition of oxidative stress
also shows anticancer effects. Antioxidants exhibit a wide
variety of biological functions, including apoptosis induction,
growth arrest, and inhibition of DNA synthesis (Di Domenico
2012; Hu 2011). Therefore,
targeting the oxidative stress
pathways through induction or inhibition, the generation of
ROS may enhance the pro-apoptotic machinery of cancer cells
and offer a novel strategy for treatment (Fig. 2).

Epidemiologic evidence suggests that higher consumption of
fruits and vegetables is associated with lower risk of most types
of cancer, perhaps, in part, due to their high vitamin C content
(Carr and Frei, 1999; Li and Schellhorn, 2007). Vitamin C can
limit the formation of carcinogens, such as nitrosamines (Hecht
1997), in vivo; modulate immune response (Carr and Frei,
1999); and, through its antioxidant function, possibly attenuate
oxidative damage that can lead to cancer. Most case–control
studies have found an inverse association between dietary
vitamin C intake and cancers of the lung, breast, colon or
rectum, stomach, oral cavity, larynx or pharynx, and esophagus
(Jacob and Sotoudeh, 2002).

It has been found that high-dose vitamin C has beneﬁcial
effects on quality of life and survival time in patients with
terminal cancer (Cameron and Pauling, 1976). Holly et al.
(2014) suggested that dietary vitamin C intake was also
statistically signiﬁcantly associated with a reduced risk of total
mortality and breast cancer speciﬁc mortality. In recent years,
the use of natural dietary antioxidants to minimize the
cytotoxicity and the damage induced in normal tissues by
antitumor agents is gaining consideration. Vitamin C has been
shown to enhance the MTZ effect allowing the utilization of
lower chemotherapic concentrations in comparison to the
single treatments (Guerriero et al., 2014).

that

usually

vitamin C supplementation,

However, evidence from prospective cohort studies is
inconsistent, possibly due to varying intakes of vitamin C
among studies. Evidence from some randomized clinical trials
suggests
in
combination with other micronutrients, does not affect cancer
risk. At this time, the evidence is inconsistent on whether
dietary vitamin C intake affects cancer risk. A substantial
limitation in interpreting many of
these studies is that
investigators did not measure vitamin C concentrations before
or after supplementation. At daily intakes of 100 mg or higher,
cells appear to be saturated and at intakes of at least 200 mg,
plasma concentrations increase only marginally (Taylor et al.,
1994). If subjects’ vitamin C levels were already close to satura-
tion at study entry, supplementation would be expected to have
made little or no difference on measured outcomes (Padayatty
and Levine, 2006).

Emerging research suggests that the route of vitamin C
could explain the
administration (intravenous vs. oral)
conﬂicting ﬁndings (Bruno et al., 2006). Oral administration of
vitamin C, even of very large doses, can raise plasma vitamin C
concentrations to a maximum of only 220 micromol/L, whereas
IV administration can produce plasma concentrations as high
as 26,000 micromol/L (Hoffer et al., 2008). Concentrations of
this magnitude are selectively cytotoxic to tumor cells in vitro
(Li and Schellhorn, 2007). Research in mice suggests that
pharmacologic doses of IV vitamin C might show promise in
treating otherwise difﬁcult-to-treat tumors and a high concen-
tration of vitamin C may act as a pro-oxidant and generate

Figure 2. Anti-cancer effect of ascorbic acid.

2630

B. V. SUNIL KUMAR ET AL.

hydrogen peroxide that has selective toxicity toward cancer
cells (Chen et al., 2008).

Anticancer mechanisms of ascorbic acid

Anti-oxidant activity
Ascorbate is an important physiological antioxidant, very
strong radical scavenger and has been shown to regenerate
other antioxidants within the body, including alphatocopherol
(vitamin E) (Jacob and Sotoudeh, 2002). Vitamin C reduces
unstable oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur radicals. In studies with
human plasma, vitamin C protected plasma lipids against
peroxidative damage induced by aqueous peroxyl radicals
(Vandenberg et al 1990).

activity, might help prevent

Ongoing research is examining whether vitamin C, by
free radicals through its
limiting the damaging effects of
antioxidant
the
development of certain cancers and other diseases in which
oxidative stress plays a crucial role. Vitamin C may act
synergetically with tocopherol (vitamin E), the principal
lipid
soluble antioxidant (Niki, 1991). It reduces nitrates and prevents
the formation of carcinogenic nitrosamines (Burton et al., 1990).

or delay

Pro-oxidant property
Vitamin C possesses antioxidant activity, but it has cytotoxic
(Gonzalez et al., 1998;
activity at higher concentrations
Yamamoto et al., 1987). High-dose ascorbate bears cytotoxic
effects on cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, making ascorbate a
pro-oxidative
peroxide
production in tissues instead of acting as a radical scavenger
(Chen et al., 2005; Du et al., 2010).

hydrogen

drug

that

catalyzes

Vitamin C can generate hydrogen peroxide upon oxidation
which is enhanced by divalent cations such as iron and copper
(Jonas et al., 1989). Hydrogen peroxide and its derivatives can
compromise cell viability mainly by damaging the cell
membranes and mitochondria. These oxidative reactions are
limited in healthy organisms because most metal
ions are
bound to proteins in serum, which makes them unavailable to
enhance the pro-oxidant activity of Vitamin C, while in
malignancy, these ions are readily available (Gutteridge et al.,
1980). These reactive species are capable of inducing multiple
negative cellular effects such as DNA strand breaks, disruption
of membrane function via lipid peroxidation, and depletion of
cellular ATP (Gonzalez et al., 1992).

capacity or

Vitamin C mediated hydrogen peroxide generation is
inhibited by serum due to certain proteins such as albumin and
glutathione with antioxidant
catalase, which
decomposes hydrogen peroxide. Other antioxidant enzymes
including glutathione peroxidase and superoxide dismutase
complement the catalase enzymatic function (Sunil Kumar et al.,
2010). Cellular damage through the accumulation of hydrogen
peroxide and decreased levels of antioxidant enzymes like cata-
lase, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase have been
presumed to be responsible for the selective toxicity of vitamin C
in malignant cells (Powers et al., 1994; Riordan et al., 1995).

Vitamin C oxidation products
Furthermore, degradation products of ascorbic acid, such as
dehydroascorbic acid, 2,3- diketogulonic acid, and 5-methyl 1-

3,4-dehydroxytetrone, have demonstrated antitumor activity
(Tsao et al., 1988; Tsao et al., 1989; Leung et al., 1993, ). These
vitamin C oxidation products and/or metabolic by-products
have a function in controlling mitotic activity. Dehydroascorbic
acid mediates its anti-tumor activity by preventing cell division
through inhibiting protein synthesis at the ribosomal level and
its prolonged exposure may cause irreparable damage resulting
ultimately in complete lysis of the cells (Grad et al., 2001).

for

requirement

Vitamin C and intracellular matrix
Ascorbic acid levels in cancer patients are signiﬁcantly reduced
suggesting an increase
its anti-tumour
mechanisms. Its deﬁciency causes generalized tissue disintegra-
tion involving the dissolution of intercellular ground substance
and disruption of collagen bundles (Kennedy, 1976). The
stromal resistance may be a physical line of defense against
cancer by encapsulating neoplastic cells with a dense ﬁbrous
tissue. This feature can be enhanced by high doses of vitamin
C. The amount of collagen present determines the strength of
the tissue and also its resistance to malignant inﬁltration.

Inhibition of matrix metelloproteinases
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-
dependent endopeptidases, which can degrade the major
components of Extra Cellular Matrix (ECM). Many reports
have shown that ECM degrading enzymes, including MMPs,
play a pivotal role in tumor invasion and metastasis (Sunil
Kumar et al., 2013b). A recent review suggested that MMP
inhibitors have strong effects at the tumor promotion stage that
may be, in part, associated with the inhibition of the expression
of enzymes related to inﬂammation, such as COX-2 and iNOS,
as well as angiogenic factors. Vitamin C downregulates MMP-2
expression/activity in human amnion cultured cells, and the
regulatory effect is exerted at the transcriptional level (Pfeffer
et al., 1998).

Apoptosis-inducing activity
Vitamin C is known for its effective antioxidant potential under
normal conditions (Padayatty et al., 2003; Sunil Kumar et al.,
2010). However, it has also been found that at higher doses,
vitamin C acts as a pro-oxidant, generating H2O2-dependent
cytotoxicity in a variety of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo
without adversely affecting normal cells (Chen et al., 2005;
Chen et al., 2008). Some studies have shown that ascorbic acid
in combination with other vitamins exert necrosis like cell
death independent of caspase-3, with a minor percentage of
cell displaying mitochondrial depolarisation and DNA
fragmentation (Verrax et al., 2005). However, the necrosis
inducing action is due to ascorbate alone or the combination
with other micro nutrients is not fully understood. Yet, the
mechanism by which vitamin C-induces apoptosis in vitro is
also not yet fully established. Few studies have reported that
Vitamin C induces apoptosis in vitro through endoplasmic
reticulum stress and mitochondrial pathway. In-vitro vitamin
C treatment is found to increase expression of pro-apoptotic
protein, Bax and tumor suppressor gene product, p53, which
usually brings about apoptosis (Kim et al., 2007).

Anti-angiogenic effect
Angiogenesis involves formation of new blood vessels in both
normal and cancerous tissues. Pathological angiogenesis is
characterized by persistent proliferation of endothelial cells and
blood vessel
formation. This complex process plays an
important role in tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis. In
addition, circulating endothelial progenitor cells are involved in
the development of vasculature, and many tumors are
associated with
cell
inﬁltration (Conejo-Garcia et al., 2004; Direkze et al., 2004).
High concentration of ascorbic acid has been found to suppress
of angiogenesis in cancer models (Peyman et al., 2007). Varied
effects of ascorbic acid supplementation on angiogenesis have
been reported (Mikirova et al., 2008). High concentrations of
ascorbic acid alter
the metabolic activity of endothelial
progenitor cells by decreasing the ATP levels. This further
prevents
signiﬁcant endothelial cell proliferation thereby
suppressing angiogenesis (Mikirova et al., 2008).

bone marrow-derived

endothelial

At higher concentrations, vitamin C has been found to limit
angiogenesis by inhibiting production of nitric oxide (NO), an
important promoter of tumor angiogenesis. As endothelial NO
formation depends on the presence of intracellular cofactors
such as: NADPH, FAD, FMN, and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4),
it
suggested that excessive ascorbate can change the
oxidation–reduction status inside the cells. This could decrease
the availability of nitric oxide,
through the formation of
peroxynitrite (Mikirova et al., 2008).

is

Other mechanisms
Vitamin C in high concentrations inhibits prostaglandins of the
2-series (arachidonic acid derived), which have been correlated
with inﬂammation and increased cell proliferation (Beetens
and Hermen, 1983). Inhibition of cell growth is also associated
with the activation of transcription factor NF-kappa B by
vitamin C (Mu~noz et al., 1997). Ascorbic acid along with
vitamin K has been suggested to cause profound perturbations
of cytoskeleton and membranes that ultimately kill the cells by
a form of cell death (autoschizis) that is distinct from apoptosis,
oncosis, or necrosis (Gilloteaux et al., 1998, 2001).

Large amounts of vitamin C intake may deplete the levels of
certain amino acids in body ﬂuids making these unavailable for
rapidly growing tumors (Riordan et al., 2000; Casciari et al.,
2001). Ascorbate is essential for immunoglobulin synthesis,
active phagocytosis, and also been shown to enhance interferon
production (Goetzl et al., 1974; Siegel et al., 1975).

Conclusion

The data described above support the exploration of vitamin D
and ascorbic acid supplementation as approaches for cancer
prevention and treatment. Various
epidemiological data
indicate that deﬁciency of these micronutrients is associated
with an increased risk and poor prognosis of several types of
cancer. Both these vitamins have prominent anti-proliferative,
anti-angiogenic, pro-apoptotic, and pro-differentiative effects
in a broad range of cancers. Several clinical trials indicate that
the administration of high-dose ascorbate and vitamin D
analogs is safe and feasible. However, more extensive random-
ized controlled trials of these micronutrients’ supplementation,

CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION

2631

alone and in combination with cytotoxic and other anticancer
agents, need to be conducted before making necessary
recommendations as dietary supplements.

References

Aggarwal, B. B. and Shishodia, S. (2006). Molecular targets of dietary agents
for prevention and therapy of cancer. Biochemical Pharmacology.
71:1397–421.

Alavi, S., Bugusu, B., Cramer, G., Dary, O., Lee, T., Martin, L., McEntire, J.
and Wailes, E. (2008). Rice Fortiﬁcation in Developing Countries: A
Critical Review of the Technical and Economic Feasibility. Available
from http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNACD279.pdf

Anand, P., Kunnumakkara, A. B., Kunnumakara, A. B., Sundaram, C.,
Harikumar, K. B., Tharakan, S. T., Lai, O. S., Sung, B. and Aggarwal, B.
B. (2008). Cancer is a preventable disease that requires major lifestyle
changes. Pharmaceutical Research. 25(9):2097–2116.

Azad, N., Iyer, A, Vallyathan, V., Wang, L., Castranova, V., Stehlik, C. and
Rojanasakul, Y. (2010). Role of oxidative/nitrosative stressmediated
Bcl2 regulation in apoptosis and malignant transformation. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences. 1203:1–6.

Bao, B. Y., Hu, Y. C., Ting, H. J. and Lee, Y. F. (2004). Androgen signaling
is required for the vitamin D-mediated growth inhibition in human
prostate cancer cells. Oncogene. 23:3350–3360.

Bao, B. Y., Ting, H. J., Hsu, J. W. and Lee, Y. F. (2008). Protective role of 1
alpha, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 against oxidative stress in nonmalig-
nant human prostate epithelial cells. International Journal of Cancer.
122:2699–2706.

Bates, C. J. (1997). Bioavailability of vitamin C. European Journal of

Clinical Nutrition. 51(Suppl 1):S28–33.

Baudet, C., Chevalier, G., Chassevent, A., Canova, C., Filmon, R., Larra, F.,
Brachet, P. and Wion, D. (1996). 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 induces
programmed cell death in a rat glioma cell line. Journal of Neuroscience
Research. 46:540–550.

Bauer, S. R., Hankinson, S. E., Bertone-Johnson, E. R. and Ding, E. L.
(2013). Plasma vitamin D levels, menopause, and risk of brast cancer:
Dose–response meta-analysis
studies. Medicine
(Baltimore). 92(3):123–131.

of prospective

Beaglehole, R., Bonita, R. and Magnusson, R. (2011). Global cancer
prevention: An important pathway to global health and development.
Public Health. 125:821–831.

Beetens, J. R. and Hermen, A. G. (1983). Ascorbic acid and Prostaglandin
formation. International Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition Research.
24(Suppl):131s–44s.

Ben-Shoshan, M., Amir, S., Dang, D.T., Dang, L.H., Weisman, Y. and
Mabjeesh, N.J. (2007). 1alpha,25- Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (calcitriol)
inhibits hypoxia-inducible factor-1/vascular endothelial growth factor
pathway in human cancer cells. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics.
6:1433–1439.

Bertone-Johnson, E. R. (2009). Vitamin D and breast cancer. Annals of

Epidemiology. 19:462–467.

Bishayee, A., Haskell, Y., Do, C., Siveen, K. S., Mohandas, N., Sethi, G. and
Stoner, G. D. (2015). Potential Beneﬁts of Edible Berries in the Man-
agement of Aerodigestive and Gastrointestinal Tract Cancers: Preclini-
cal and Clinical Evidence. Critical Reviews in Food Science and
Nutrition. DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2014.982243.

Brenza, H. L. and DeLuca, H. F. (2000). Regulation of 25- hydroxyvitamin
D3 1a-hydroxylase gene expression by parathyroid hormone and 1,
25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics.
381:143–152

Bruno, E. J. Jr, Ziegenfuss, T. N. and Landis, J. (2006). Vitamin C: Research

update. Current Sports Medicine Reports. 5:177–81.

Burton, G. W., Wronska, U. and Stone, L. (1990). Biokinetics of die-
tary RRR-OC-tocopherol in the male guinea pig at three dietary
levels of vitamin C does not spare vitamin E in vivo. Lipids.
25:199–210.

Calvo, M. S. and Whiting, S. J. (2013). Survey of current vitamin D food
fortiﬁcation practices in the United States and Canada. The Journal of
Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. 136:211–213.

2632

B. V. SUNIL KUMAR ET AL.

Calvo, M. S., Whiting, S. J. and Barton, C. N. (2004). Vitamin D fortiﬁca-
tion in the United States and Canada: Current status and data needs.
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 80:1710S–1716S.

Cameron, E. and Pauling, L. (1976). Supplemental ascorbate in the
supportive treatment of cancer: Prolongation of survival times in termi-
nal human cancer. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA.
73:3685–3689.

Cameron, E. and Pauling, L. (1973). Ascorbic acid and the glycosaminogly-
can: An orthomolecular approach to cancer and other diseases.
Oncology. 27:181–92.

Cancer Fact sheet. World Health Organization (2014). Retrieved 10 June

2014.

Carr, A. C. and Frei, B. (1999). Toward a new recommended dietary
allowance for vitamin C based on antioxidant and health effects in
humans. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 69:1086–1107.

Casciari, J. J., Riordan, N. H., Schmidt, T. L., Meng, X. L., Jackson, J. A. and
Riordan, H. D. (2001). Cytotoxicity of ascorbate, lipoic acid and other
antioxidants in hollow ﬁber in vitro tumours. British Journal of Cancer.
84:1544–50.

Cauley, J. A., Chlebowski, R. T., Wactawski-Wende, J., Robbins, J. A.,
Rodabough, R. J., Chen, Z., Johnson, K. C., O’sullivan, M. J., Jackson,
R. D. and Manson, J. E. (2013). Calcium plus vitamin D supplementa-
tion and health outcomes ﬁve years after active intervention ended:
Journal of Women’s Health. 22
The Women’s Health Initiative.
(11):915–929.

Chan, J. M., Pietinen, P., Virtanen, M., Malila, N., Tangrea, J., Albanes, D.
and Virtamo, J. (2000). Diet and prostate cancer risk in a cohort of
smokers, with a speciﬁc focus on calcium and phosphorus (Finland).
Cancer Causes Control. 11:859–867.

Chaudhary, N., Sunil Kumar, B. V., Bhardwaj, R. and Singh, T. (2014).
Expression of erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2
(ERBB2) from canine mammary tumor. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, India Section B: Biological Sciences. DOI 10.1007/
s40011-014-0455-z.

Chen, Q., Espey, M. G., Krishna, M. C., Mitchell, J. B., Corpe, C. P.,
Buettner, G. R., Shacter, E. and Levine, M. (2005). Pharmacologic
ascorbic acid concentrations selectively kill cancer cells: Action as a
pro-drug to deliver hydrogen peroxide to tissues. Proceedings of
National Academy of Sciences USA. 102(38):13604–13609.

Chen, Q., Espey, M. G., Sun, A. Y., Pooput, C., Kirk, K. L. and Krishna, M.
C. (2008) Pharmacologic doses of ascorbate act as a prooxidant and
decrease growth of aggressive tumor xenografts in mice. Proceedings of
National Academy of Sciences USA. 105:11105–11109

Chen, Q., Espey, M. G., Sun, A. Y., Pooput, C., Kirk, K. L., Krishna, M. C.,
Khosh Jeanne Drisko, D. B. and Levine, M. (2008). Pharmacologic
doses of ascorbate act as a prooxidant and decrease growth of
aggressive tumor xenografts in mice. Proceedings of National Academy
of Sciences USA. 105:11105–11109.

Chen, Q., Espey, M. G., Sun, A. Y., Pooput, C., Kirk, K. L., Krishna, M. C.,
Khosh, D. B., Drisko, J. and Levine, M. (2008). Pharmacologic doses of
ascorbate act as a prooxidant and decrease growth of aggressive tumor
xenografts in mice. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA.
105(32):11105–11109.

Chlebowski, R. T.,

Johnson, K. C., Kooperberg, C., Pettinger, M.,
Wactawski-Wende, J., Rohan, T., Rossouw, J., Lane, D., O’sullivan, M.
J., Yasmeen, S., Hiatt, R. A., Shikany, J. M., Vitolins, M., Khandekar, J.,
Hubbell, F. A. and Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. (2008).
Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of breast cancer.
Journal of National Cancer Institute. 100:1581–1591.

Conejo-Garcia, J. R., Benencia, F., Courreges, M. C., Mohamed-Hodley, A.,
Buckanovich, R. J., Holtz, D. O., Jenkins, A., Zhang, L. N. H., Wagner,
D. S., Katsaros, D., Caroll, R. and Coukos, G. (2004). Tumor-inﬁltrating
dendritic cells precursors recruited by a beta-defensin contribute to
vasculogenesis under the inﬂuence of Vegf-A. Nature Medicine.
10:950–958.

De Zarn, T. J. (1995). Food ingredient encapsulation. In: Encapsulation
and controlled release of food ingredients. American Chemical Society
Symposium Series 590, pp. 113–131. Risch, S. J. and Reineccius, G. A.,
Ed., American Chemical Society, Washington, DC.

Deeb, K. K., Trump, D. L. and Johnson, C. S. (2007). Vitamin D signalling
for anticancer therapeutics. Nature

pathways in cancer: Potential
Reviews Cancer. 7:684–700.

Di Domenico, F., Foppoli, C., Coccia, R. and Perluigi, M. (2012).
Antioxidants in cervical cancer: Chemopreventive and chemotherapeu-
tic effects of polyphenols. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 1822:737–747.
Direkze, N. C., Hodivala-Dilke, K., Jeffery, R., Hunt, T., Poulsom, R.,
Oukrif, D., Alison, M. R. and Wright, N. A. (2004). Bone marrow
contribution to tumor associated myoﬁbroblasts and ﬁbroblasts. Can-
cer Research. 64:8492–8495.

Du, J., Martin, S. M., Levine, M., Wagner, B. A., Buettner, G. R. and Wang,
(2010) Mechanisms of ascorbate induced cytotoxicity In

S. H.
pancreatic cancer. Clinical Cancer Research. 16:509–20

Feldman, D., Skowronski, R. J. and Peehl, D. M. (1995). Vitamin D and
in Experimental and Medical Biology.

prostate cancer. Advances
375:53–63.

Fleet, J.C., DeSmet, M., Johnson, R. and Li, Y. (2012). Vitamin D and
Journal.

cancer: A review of molecular mechanisms. Biochemical
441:61–76.

Gandini, S., Boniol, M., Haukka, J., Byrnes, G., Cox, B., Sneyd, M.J., Mullie,
P. and Autier, P. (2011). Meta-analysis of observational studies of
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and colorectal, breast and prostate
cancer and colorectal adenoma. International Journal of Cancer. 128
(6):1414–1424.

Garavello, W., Lucenteforte, E., Bosetti, C. and La Vecchia, C. (2009). The
role of foods and nutrients on oral and pharyngeal cancer risk. Minerva
Stomatologica. 58:25–34.

Gilloteaux, J., Jamison, J. M., Arnold, D., Ervin, E., Echroat, L., Docherty, J.
J., Neal, D. and Summers, J. L. (1998). Cancer cell necrosis by
autoshizis: Synergism of antitumor activity of vitamin C: Vitamin K3
on human bladder carcinoma T-24 cells. Scanning. 20:564–75.

Gilloteaux, J., Jamison, J. M., Arnold, D., Taper, H. S. and Summers, J. L.
(2001). Ultrastructural aspects of autoshizis: A new cancer cell death
induced by the synergistic action of ascorbate/menadione on human
bladder carcinoma cells. Ultrastructural Pathology. 25:183–92.

Goetzl, E. J., Wasserman, S. I., Gigli, I. and Austen, K. F. (1974).
Enhancement of random migration and chemotactic response of
human leukocytes by ascorbic acid. Journal of Clinical Investigation.
53:813–8.

Gonzalez, M.J. (1992). Lipid peroxidation and tumor growth: An inverse

relationship. Medical Hypotheses. 38:106–10.

Gonzalez, M. J., Mora, E., Riordan, N. H., Riordan, H. D. and Mojica, P.
(1998). Rethinking vitamin C and cancer: An update on nutritional
oncology. Cancer Prevention International. 3:215–24.

Goodwin, P. J., Ennis, M., Pritchard, K. I., Koo, J. and Hood, N. (2009).
Prognostic effects of 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in early breast cancer.
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 27:3757–3763.

Grad, J. M., Bahlis, N. J., Reis, I., Oshiro, M. M., Dalton, W. S. and Boise, L.
H. (2001). Ascorbic acid enhances arsenic trioxide-induced cytotoxicity
in multiple myeloma cells. Blood. 98:805–13.

Gregory, J. F. 3rd. (1993). Ascorbic acid bioavailability in foods and

supplements. Nutrition Reviews. 51:301–303.

Guerriero, E., Sorice, A., Capone, F., Napolitano, V., Colonna, G., Storti,
G., Castello, G. and Costantini1, S. (2014). Vitamin C effect on
mitoxantrone-induced cytotoxicity in human breast cancer cell lines.
PLOS One. DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0115287

Gutteridge, J. M. C., Richmond, R. and Halliwell, B. (1980). Oxygen free-
radicals and lipid peroxidation: Inhibition by the protein caeruloplas-
min. FEBS Letters. 112:269–72.

Harris, H. R., Orsini, N. and Wolk, A. (2014). Vitamin C and survival
among women with breast cancer: A meta-analysis. European Journal
of Cancer. 50:1223–1231.

Hecht, S. S. (1997). Approaches to cancer prevention based on an
understanding of N-nitrosamine carcinogenesis. Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine. 216:181–191.

Hoffer, L. J., Levine, M., Assouline, S., Melnychuk, D., Padayatty, S. J.,
Rosadiuk, K., Rousseau, C., Robitaille, L. and Miller, W.H. Jr. (2008).
Phase I clinical trial of i.v. ascorbic acid in advanced malignancy.
Annals of Oncology. 19:1969–1974.

Holly, R., Orsini, H. N. and Wolk, A. (2014). Vitamin C and survival
among women with breast cancer: A Meta-analysis. European Journal
of Cancer. 50:1223–1231.

Hu, M. L. (2011). Dietary polyphenols as antioxidants and anticancer
agents: More questions than answers. Chang Gung Medical Journal.
34:449–460.

Institute of Medicine (US) Committee to Review Dietary Reference Intakes
for Vitamin D and Calcium; Ross, A. C., Taylor, C. L. and Yaktine, A.
L. et al., editors. Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D.
Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2011. Available
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK56070/

Institute of Medicine. Food and Nutrition Board. Dietary Reference
Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2000. Nutrition and
Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. (2012). American
Cancer Society Guidelines on nutrition and physical activity for cancer
prevention: Reducing the risk of cancer with healthy food choices and
physical activity. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 62:30-67.

Iqbal, M. U. N., Khan, T. A. and Maqbool, S. A. (2015). Vitamin D
Receptor Cdx-2 Polymorphism and Premenopausal Breast Cancer Risk
in Southern Pakistani Patients. PLoS One. 10(3):e0122657. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0122657.

Jacob, R. A. and Sotoudeh, G. (2002). Vitamin C function and status in

chronic disease. Nutrition in Clinical Care. 5:66–74.

Jensen, S. S., Madsen, M. W., Lukas, J., Binderup, L. and Bartek, J. (2001).
Inhibitory effects of 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) on the G(1)-S
phase-controlling machinery. Molecular Endocrinology. 15:1370–1380.
Jonas, S. K., Riley, P. A. and Willson, R. L. (1989). Hydrogen peroxide

cytotoxicity. Biochemical Journal. 264:651–655.

Kennedy, J. F. (1976). Chemical and biochemical aspects of the glycosami-
noglycans and proteoglycans in health and disease. Advances in Clinical
Chemistry. 18:1–101.

Kim, J. E., Kang, J. S., Jung, D. J., Hahm, E., Lee, S. K., Bae, S. Y., Hwang,
Y., Shin, D. H. and Lee, W. J. (2007). Vitamin C induces apoptosis in
human colon cancer cells through endoplasmic reticulum stress and
mitochondrial pathway. The Journal of Immunology. 178:(1 Supple-
ment): S87–S88.

Konety, B. R. and Getzenberg, R. H. (2002). Vitamin D and prostate

cancer. Urologic Clinics of North America. 29:95–106.

Krishnan, A. V., Peehl, D. M. and Feldman, D. (2005). In: Vitamin D and
Prostate Cancer, Vitamin D, pp. 1679–1707. Feldman, D., Pike, J.W.
and Glorieux, F., Eds., Academic Press, San Diego.

Kushi, L. H., Doyle, C., McCullough, M., Rock, C. L., Demark-Wahnefried,
W., Bandera, E. V., Gapstur, S., Patel, A. V., Andrews, K., Gansler, T.
and American Cancer Society (2010). Nutrition and Physical Activity
Guidelines Advisory Committee. (2012). American Cancer Society
Guidelines on nutrition and physical activity for cancer prevention:
Reducing the risk of cancer with healthy food choices and physical
activity. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 62:30–67.

Kwan, H. Y., Chao, X., Su, T., Fu, X., Wing Tse, A. K., Fong, W. F. and Yu,
Z. L.
and Anti-obesity Effects of
Mediterranean Diet. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition.
DOI: 10.1080/10408398.2013.852510.

(2015). The Anti-cancer

Kyle, J. A., Sharp, L., Little, J., Duthie, G. G. and McNeill, G. (2010).
Dietary ﬂavonoid intake and colorectal cancer: A case–control study.
British Journal of Nutrition. 103:429–436.

Leung, P. Y., Miyashita, K., Young, M. and Tsao, C. S. (1993). Cytotoxic
effect of ascorbate and its derivative on cultured malignant and
nonmalignant cell lines. Anticancer Research. 13:47–80.

Li, P., Li, C., Zhao, X., Zhang, X., Nicosia, S. V. and Bai, W. (2004). p27
(Kip1) stabilization and G(1) arrest by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) in
ovarian cancer cells mediated through down-regulation of cyclin E/
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 and Skp1-Cullin-F-box protein/Skp2
ubiquitin ligase. The Journal of Biological Chemistry. 279:25260–25267.
Li, Y. and Schellhorn, H. E. (2007). New developments and novel
therapeutic perspectives for vitamin C. Journal of Nutrition. 137:
2171–2184.

Lim, S. T., Jeon, Y. W. and Suh, Y. J. (2015). Association between altera-
tions in the serum 25-hydroxyvitamin d status during follow-up and

CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION

2633

breast cancer patient prognosis. Asian Paciﬁc Journal of Cancer Preven-
tion. 16(6):2507–2513.

Loker, G. B., Ugur, M. and Yildiz, M. (2003). A partial supplementation of
pasteurized milk with vitamin C, iron and zinc. Nahrung. 47(1):17–20.
Lopes, N., Sousa, B., Martins, D., Gomes, M., Vieira, D., Veronese. L. A.,
Milanezi, F., Paredes, J., Costa, J. L. and Schmitt, F. (2010). Alterations
in Vitamin D signalling and metabolic pathways in breast cancer
progression: A study of VDR, CYP27B1 and CYP24A1 expression in
benign and malignant breast lesions Vitamin D pathways unbalanced
in breast lesions. BMC Cancer. 10:483.

Losso, J. N. and Bawadi, H. A. (2005). Hypoxia inducible factor pathways
foods. Journal of Agricultural and Food

as targets for functional
Chemistry. 53:3751–3768.

Lu, Z., Chen, T. C., Zhang, A., Persons, K. S., Kohn, N., Berkowitz, R.,
Martinello, S. and Holick, M. F. (2007). An evaluation of the vitamin
D3 content in ﬁsh: Is the vitamin D content adequate to satisfy the
dietary requirement for vitamin D? The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology. 103:642–644.

Ma, Y., Zhang, P., Wang, F., Yang, J., Liu, Z. and Qin, H. (2011).
Association between vitamin D and risk of colorectal cancer: A
systematic review of prospective studies. Journal of Clinical Oncology.
29(28):3775–3782.

Madsen, K. H., Rasmussen, L. B., Andersen, R., Molgaard, C., Jakobsen, J.,
Bjerrum, P. J., Andersen, E. W., Mejborn, H. and Tetens, I. (2013).
Randomized controlled trial of the effects of Vitamin D-fortiﬁed milk
and bread on serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D concentrations in families
in Denmark during winter: The vitmad study. The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition. 98:374–382.

Matsumoto, Y., Kittaka, A. and Chen, T. C. (2015). 19-Norvitamin D
analogs for breast cancer therapy. Canadian Journal of Physiology and
Pharmacology. 6:1–16.

Meyer, M. B., Goetsch, P. D. and Pike, J. W. (2012). VDR/RXR and TCF4/
b-catenin cistromes in colonic cells of colorectal tumor origin: Impact
on c-FOS and c-MYC gene expression. Molecular Endocrinology.
26:37–51.

Mikirova, N. A., Ichim, T. E. and Riordan, N. H. (2008). Anti-angiogenic
effect of high doses of ascorbic acid. Journal of Translational Medicine.
6:50–58.

Miller, G. J. (1998). Vitamin D and prostate cancer: Biologic interactions

and clinical potentials, Cancer Metastasis Reviews. 17:353–360.

Mocanu, V., Stitt, P..A., Costan, A..R., Voroniuc, O., Zbranca, E., Luca, V.
and Vieth, R. (2009). Long-term effects of giving nursing home
residents bread fortiﬁed with 125 mg (5000 IU) vitamin D3 per daily
serving. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 89:1132–1137.

Moreno,

J., Krishnan, A. V. and Feldman, D.

(2005). Molecular
mechanisms mediating the anti-proliferative effects of Vitamin D in
prostate cancer. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology.
97:31–36.

Munoz, E., Blazquez, M. V., Ortiz, C., Gomez-Diaz, C. and Navas, P.
(1997). Role of ascorbate in the activation of NF-kB by tumour necrosis
factor-a in T-cells. Biochemical Journal. 325:23–8.

Natri, A. M., Salo, P., Vikstedt, T., Palssa, A., Huttunen, M., Karkkainen,
M. U., Salovaara, H., Piironen, V., Jakobsen, J. and Lamberg-Allardt, C.
J. (2006). Bread fortiﬁed with cholecalciferol
increases the serum
25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration in women as effectively as a
cholecalciferol supplement. Journal of Nutrition. 136:123–127.

Niki, E. (1991). Action of ascorbic acid as a scavenger of active and stable
oxygen radicals. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 54:
1119s–24s.

Norman, A. W. (1998) Sunlight, season, skin pigmentation, vitamin D, and
25-hydroxyvitamin D: Integral components of the vitamin D endocrine
system. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 67:1108–1110.

Otten, J. J., Hellwig, J. P. and Meyers, L. D. (2006). Vitamin D. In: Dietary
Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements.
National Academies Press, Washington, DC.

Padayatty, S. J., Katz, A., Wang, Y., Eck, P., Kwon, O., Lee, J. H., Chen, S.,
Corpe, C., Dutta, A., Dutta, S. K. and Levine, M. (2003). Vitamin C as
an antioxidant: Evaluation of its role in disease prevention. The Journal
of the American College of Nutrition. 22(1):18–35.

2634

B. V. SUNIL KUMAR ET AL.

Padayatty, S. J. and Levine, M. (2006). Vitamins C and E and the
prevention of preeclampsia. The New England Journal of Medicine.
355:1065.

Padayatty, S. J., Sun, H., Wang, Y., Riordan, H. D., Hewitt, S. M., Katz, A.,
Wesley, R. A. and Levine, M. (2004). Vitamin C pharmacokinetics:
Implications for oral and intravenous use. Annals of Internal Medicine.
140:533–537.

Parise, R. A., Egorin, M. J., Kanterewicz, B., Taimi, M., Petkovich, M., Lew,
A. M., Chuang, S. S., Nichols, M. M., El-Hefnawy, T. and Hershberger,
P. A. (2006). CYP24, the enzyme that catabolizes the antiproliferative
agent vitamin D, is increased in lung cancer. International Journal of
Cancer. 119:1819–1828.

Park, H., Seib, P. A. and Chung, O. K. (1994). Stabilities of several forms of
vitamin C during making and storing of pup-loaves of white pan bread.
Cereal Chemistry. 71(5):412–417.

Peehl, D. M., Seto, E., Hsu, J. Y. and Feldman, D. (2002). Preclinical
activity of ketoconazole in combination with calcitriol or the vitamin D
analogue EB 1089 in prostate cancer cells.
Journal of Urology.
168:1583–1588.

Pelucchi, C., Bosetti, C., Rossi, M., Negri, E., La Vecchia, C. (2009).
Selected aspects of Mediterranean diet and cancer risk. Nutrition and
Cancer. 61:756–766.

Peyman, G. A., Kivilcim, M., Dellacroce, J. T. and Munoz Morales, A.
(2007). Inhibition of Corneal Neovascularization by Ascorbic Acid in
Rat Model [abstract]. Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and Experimental
Ophthalmology. 245(10):1461–1467.

Pfeffer, F., Casanueva, E., Kamar, J., Guerra, A., Perichart, O. and
Vadillo-Ortega, F.
(1998). Modulation of 72-kilodalton type IV
collagenase (Matrix metalloproteinase-2) by ascorbic acid in cultured
human amnion-derived cells. Biology of Reproduction. 52:326.

Powers, H.

J., Gibson, A. T., Bates, C.

J., Primhak, R. A. and
Beresford, J. (1994). Does vitamin C intake inﬂuence the rate of
tyrosine catabolism in premature babies? Annals of Nutrition and
Metabolism. 38:166–173.

Pulito, C., Terrenato, I., Di Benedetto, A., Korita, E., Goeman, F., Sacconi,
A., Biagioni, F., Blandino, G., Strano, S., Muti, P., Mottolese, M. and
Falvo, E. (2015). Cdx2 Polymorphism Affects the Activities of Vitamin
D Receptor in Human Breast Cancer Cell Lines and Human Breast
Carcinomas. PLoS One. 10(4):e0124894. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0124894.

Riordan, N. H., Riordan, H. D. and Casciari, J. J. (2000). Clinical and
experimental experiences with intravenous vitamin C. The Journal of
Orthomolecular Medicine. 15:201–13.

Riordan, N. H., Riordan, H. D., Meng, X. L., Li, Y. and Jackson, J. A.
(1995). Intravenous ascorbate as a tumor cytotoxic chemotherapeutic
agent. Medical Hypotheses. 44:207–13.

Ritu, G. and Gupta, A. (2014). Vitamin D deﬁciency in india: Prevalence,

causalities and interventions. Nutrients. 6:729–775.

Rose, A. A. N., Elser, C. and Ennis, M. (2013). Blood levels of vitamin D
and early stage breast cancer prognosis: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment. 141:331–339.

Salehi-Tabar, R., Nguyen-Yamamoto, L., Tavera-Mendoza, L. E., Quail, T.,
Dimitrov, V., An, B. S., Glass, L., Goltzman, D. and White, J. H. (2012).
Vitamin D receptor as a master regulator of the c-MYC/MXD1 net-
work. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences USA. 109:
18827–18832.

Sasco, A. J., Secretan, M. B. and Straif, K. (2004). Tobacco smoking and
cancer: A brief review of recent epidemiological evidence. Lung cancer.
45:S3–9.

Scatena, R. (2012). Mitochondria and cancer: A growing role in apoptosis,
cancer cell metabolism and dedifferentiation. Advances in Experimental
Medicine and Biology. 942:287–308.

Schwartz, G. G., Whitlatch, L. W., Chen, T. C., Lokeshwar, B. L. and
Holick, M. F. (1998). Human prostate cells synthesize 1, 25-dihydroxy-
vitamin D3 from 25- hydroxyvitamin D3. Cancer Epidemiology,
Biomarkers and Prevention. 7:391–395.

Sharma, R. (2005). Fortiﬁcation of milk with microencapsulated vitamin C
and its thermal stability. Journal of Food Science and Technology. 42
(2):191–194.

Siegel, B.V. (1975). Enhancement of interferon production by poly (r1),
poly (rC) in mouse cell cultures by ascorbic acid. Nature. 254:531–532.
Steele, C. (1976). Cereal fortiﬁcation: Technological problems. Cereal

Foods World. 21:538–540.

Stephen, R. and Utecht, T. (2001). Scurvy identiﬁed in the emergency
department: A case report. The Journal of Emergency Medicine.
21:235–237.

Sunil Kumar, B. V. and Kataria, M. (2013). Identiﬁcation of single
nucleotide polymorphism in stromelysin-3 catalytic domain in canine
mammary tumors. Journal of Applied Animal Research. 41(3):366–369.
Sunil Kumar, B. V., Kumar, K. A., Padmanath, K., Saxena, M., Sharma, B.
and Kataria, M.
(2013a). Development of Recombinant Matrix
Metalloproteinase-11 Based Sandwich ELISA for the Diagnosis of
Canine Mammary Tumor. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, India Section B: Biological Sciences. 83(2):181–185.

Sunil Kumar, B. V., Kumar, K. A., Padmanath, K., Sharma, B. and Kataria,
M. (2013b). Heterologous Expression and Functional Characterization
of Matrix Metalloproteinase-11 from Canine Mammary Tumor.
Animal Biotechnology. 24(1):31–43.

Sunil Kumar, B. V., Singh, G. and Meur, S. K. (2010). Effects of addition of
electrolyte and ascorbic acid in feed during heat stress in buffaloes.
Asian Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences. 23(7):880–888.

Tang, C., Chen, N., Wu, M., Yuan, H. and Du, Y. (2009). Fok1
polymorphism of vitamin D receptor gene contributes to breast cancer
susceptibility: A meta-analysis. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment.
117:391–399.

J.

Taylor, P. R., Li, B., Dawsey, S. M., Li, J. Y., Yang, C. S., Guo, W. and Blot,
W.
the nutrition
intervention trials in Linxian, China. Linxian Nutrition Intervention
Trials Study Group. Cancer Research. 54(7S):2029s-2031s.

(1994). Prevention of

esophageal

cancer:

Tomiska, M., Novotna, S., Klvacova, L., Tumova, J. and Janikova, A.
(2015). Vitamin D during cancer treatment. Klinicka onkologie. 28
(2):99–104.

Townsend, K., Banwell, C. M., Guy, M., Colston, K.W., Mansi, J. L.,
Stewart, P. M., Campbell, M. J. and Hewison, M. (2005). Autocrine
metabolism of vitamin D in normal and malignant breast tissue.
Clinical Cancer Research. 11:3579–86.

Tsao, C. S., Dunhan, W. B. and Leung, P. Y. (1988). In vivo antineoplastic
activity of ascorbic acid for human mammary tumor. In vivo. 2:147–50.
Tsao, C. S., Dunhan, W. B. and Leung, P. Y. (1989). Effect of ascorbic acid
and its derivatives on the growth of human mammary tumor
xenografts in mice. The Cancer Journal. 5:53–9.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service. 2011.
USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 24.
Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page, http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/
bhnrc/ndl.

Valko, M., Leibfritz, D., Moncol, J., Cronin, M. T., Mazur, M. and Telser, J.
(2007). Free radicals and antioxidants in normal physiological func-
tions and human disease. The International Journal of Biochemistry &
Cell Biology. 39:44–84.

Vandenberg, J. J., Kuypers, F. A., Roelofsen, B. and Op den Kamp, J. A.
(1990). The cooperative action of vitamins E and C in the protection
against peroxidation of parinanic
acid in human erythrocyte
menbranes. Chemistry and Physics of Lipids. 53:309–20.

Verrax, J., Delvaux, M., Beghein, N., Taper, H., Gallez, B. and Buc
Calderon, P. (2005). Enhancement of quinone redox cycling by
ascorbate induces a caspase-3 independent cell death in human leukae-
mia cells. An in vitro comparative study. Free Radical Research. 39
(6):649–657.

Visioli, F., Bogani, P., Grande, S., and Galli, C. (2005). Mediterranean food
Journal of Physiology and

and health: Building human evidence.
Pharmacology. 56(S1):37–49.

Wang, A. H. and Still, C. (2007). Old world meets modern: A case report of

scurvy. Nutrition in Clinical Practice. 22:445–448.

Wang, D., Velez de-la-Paz, O. I., Zhai, J. X. and Liu, D. W. (2013). Serum
25-hydroxyvitamin D and breast cancer risk: A meta-analysis of
prospective studies. Tumor Biology. 34(6):3509–3517.

Washington, M. N., Kim, J. S. and Weigel, N. L. (2011). 1a,25-dihydroxy-
vitamin D3 inhibits C4–2 prostate cancer cell growth via a retinoblas-
toma protein (Rb)-independent G1 arrest. The Prostate. 71:98–110.

CRITICAL REVIEWS IN FOOD SCIENCE AND NUTRITION

2635

Weinstein, M., Babyn, P. and Zlotkin, S. (2001). An orange a day keeps the

doctor away: Scurvy in the year 2000. Pediatrics. 108(3):E55.

World Cancer Report (2014). World Health Organization. pp. Chapter 1.1.

ISBN 9283204298.

Wyllie, A. H. (1987). Apoptosis: Cell death in tissue regulation. The Journal

of Pathology. 153:313–316.

Xu, Y., Shibata, A., McNeal, J. E., Stamey, T. A., Feldman, D. and Peehl, D.
M. (2003). Vitamin D receptor start codon polymorphism (FokI) and
prostate cancer progression. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
Prevention. 12:23–27.

Yamamoto, K., Takahashi, M. and Niki, E. (1987). Role of iron and ascorbic acid

in the oxidation of methyl linoleate micelles. Chemistry Letters. 1:49–52.

Yang, Z., Laillou, A., Smith, G., Schoﬁeld, D. and Moench-Pfanner, R.
(2013). A review of vitamin D fortiﬁcation: Implications for nutrition
programming in southeast Asia. Food and Nutrition Bulletin. 34:
S81–S89.

Zehnder, D., Bland, R., Williams, M. C., McNinch, R. W., Howie, A.
J., Stewart. P. M. and Hewison, M. (2001). Extrarenal expression of
25-hydroxyvitamin d(3)1 a-hydroxylase. The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism. 86:888–894.

