Nutrition and Cancer

Orally Administered Green Tea Polyphenols Prevent Ultraviolet Radiation-
Induced Skin Cancer in Mice through Activation of Cytotoxic T Cells and
Inhibition of Angiogenesis in Tumors1,2

Sudheer K. Mantena,* Syed M. Meeran,* Craig A. Elmets,*†** and Santosh K. Katiyar*†**3
*Department of Dermatology, †Skin Diseases Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL and **VA Medical Center, Birmingham, AL

ABSTRACT Green tea polyphenols (GTPs) show promise as anticarcinogenic agents and may prevent the develop-
ment of solar UV radiation–induced skin cancer. Here we investigated the mechanisms by which GTPs prevent
UVB-induced skin cancer in mice. Two groups of 6- to 7-wk-old female SKH-1 hairless mice were UVB irradiated (180
mJ/cm2) 3 times each week for 24 wk. One group consumed water and the other, water containing 2 g/L GTPs. A
control group drank water and was not exposed to UVB radiation. UVB-induced tumors and skin biopsies from the
control group were analyzed using immunostaining, Western blotting, and gelatinolytic zymography. Oral administration
of GTPs reduced UVB-induced tumor incidence (35%), tumor multiplicity (63%), and tumor growth (55%). The
GTPs⫹UVB group had reduced expression of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2 and MMP-9, which have crucial
roles in tumor growth and metastasis, and enhanced expression of tissue inhibitor of MMP in the tumors compared with
mice that were treated with UVB alone. The GTPs⫹UVB group also had reduced expressions of CD31 and vascular
endothelial growth factor, which are essential for angiogenesis, and inhibited expression of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen in the tumors compared with the UVB group. Additionally, there were more cytotoxic CD8⫹ T cells in the tumors
of the GTPs⫹UVB group than in the UVB group and their tumor cells exhibited greater activation of caspase-3,
indicating the apoptotic death of the tumor cells. Taken together, these data suggest that in mice, administration of
GTPs affects several biomarkers that are involved in UV-carcinogenesis, including inhibition of angiogenic factors and
recruitment of cytotoxic T cells in the tumor microenvironment.

J. Nutr. 135: 2871–2877, 2005.

KEY WORDS:
● cytotoxic T cells

● green tea polyphenols ● matrix metalloproteinases ● ultraviolet radiation ● angiogenesis

Nonmelanoma skin cancers, including basal and squamous
cell carcinoma, represent the most common malignant neoplasms
in humans, particularly in Caucasians. Although many environ-
mental and genetic factors contribute to the development of skin
cancers, epidemiologic, clinical and biological studies have estab-
lished that chronic exposure to UV radiation is a well-recognized
etiological agent for both nonmelanoma and melanoma skin
cancers, and accounts for ⬃1.3 million new cases of skin cancers
each year in the United States (1). These numbers are probably
underestimates because many skin cancers are treated or removed
in clinics without being reported to cancer registries. Thus, cu-
taneous malignancies currently are a major burden on public
health and healthcare expenditures. Moreover, it is expected that

1 Presented at the 2005 Annual Meeting of the Society of Investigative Der-
matology, May 2005, St. Louis, MO [Mantena, S. K., Roy, A. M., Elmets, C. A. &
Katiyar, S. K.
(2005) Orally administered green tea prevents UVB-induced skin
tumor growth through the inhibition of angiogenesis and stimulation of cytotoxic
T cells in tumors. J. Investig. Dermatol. 124: A131 (abs.)].

2 Supported by the funds from U.S. Public Health Service Grants, CA105368
and CA79820, the Merit Review Awards from the Veterans Administration (S.K.K.
and C.A.E.), and the UAB Skin Diseases Research Center (AR050948-01). This
work was conducted in a facility constructed with support from Research Facil-
ities Improvement Program Grant No. C06 RR 15490 from the National Center for
Research Resources (National Institutes of Health).

3 To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: skatiyar@uab.edu.

the dramatic recent increase in the incidence of skin cancer will
be sustained due to the aging of the population, the greater
amounts of UV radiation reaching the surface of the earth be-
cause of depletion of the ozone layer (2–4), and the continuing
use of sun tanning devices for cosmetic purposes. The develop-
ment of effective chemopreventive agents that can reduce or
control the risk of UV-induced skin cancer is required to address
this pressing public health issue.

In recent years, there has been a great interest in the use of
dietary supplements in the form of complementary and alter-
native medicines that are derived from naturally occurring
botanicals for the prevention of UV photodamage, including
skin cancer risk. Botanical supplements, speciﬁcally dietary
botanicals, possessing anti-inﬂammatory, immunomodulatory,
and antioxidant properties are among the most promising
group of compounds that can be exploited as ideal chemopre-
ventive agents for skin cancer prevention.

Using in vitro and in vivo model systems, we and others
showed that green tea polyphenols (GTPs)4 have potent anti-

4 Abbreviations used: EGCG, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate; FITC, ﬂuorescein
isothiocyanate; GTP, green tea polyphenol; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase;
PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; PE, phycoerythrin; PMSF, phenylmeth-
ylsulfonyl ﬂuoride; TIMP, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase; VEGF, vas-
cular endothelial growth factor.

0022-3166/05 $8.00 © 2005 American Society for Nutrition.
Manuscript received 1 August 2005. Initial review completed 23 August 2005. Revision accepted 19 September 2005.

2871

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/12/2871/4669980
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

2872

MANTENA ET AL.

inﬂammatory, antioxidant, and immunomodulatory activities
(5–7). Topical application of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate
(EGCG), a major chemopreventive constituent of GTPs, or
oral administration of a crude water extract of green tea as the
sole source of drinking water to SKH-1 hairless mice was
shown to inhibit the growth of UV-induced skin tumors (8,9).
However, the mechanisms by which the GTPs exert antipho-
tocarcinogenic effects in vivo in tumors have not been well
deﬁned. We therefore conducted this study using the UVB-
induction of skin tumors in SKH-1 hairless mice. Puriﬁed
GTPs were administered orally in the drinking water (2 g/L)
because green tea is commonly consumed as a beverage. Thus,
the information generated by this study should be directly
relevant to the development of this agent as a complementary
and alternative medicine for the prevention of solar UVB-
induced cutaneous malignancies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals. The 6- to 7-wk-old female SKH-1 hairless mice used in
this study were obtained from Charles River Laboratories. Mice were
housed 5/cage and acclimated for at least 1 wk in the animal research
facility before their use in this study. The mice were maintained
under standard conditions with a 12-h light:dark cycle, 24 ⫾ 2°C
temperature, and 50 ⫾ 10% relative humidity. They consumed an
AIN76A control diet and drinking water ad libitum (10). The animal
protocol for this study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee of the University of Alabama at Birmingham, in
accordance with the current USDA and Department of Health and
Human Service regulations and standards. A group of mice also
consumed the AIN76A diet and water ad libitum but without treat-
ment with GTPs and UVB irradiation. At the end of the photocar-
cinogenesis experiment, mice were killed by exposure to CO2 gas
followed by cervical dislocation to conﬁrm their death, as recom-
mended by IACUC.

Experimental design and photocarcinogenesis protocol. After
in the Animal
acclimation for at least 1 wk after their arrival
Research Facility, the mice were divided into 3 age-matched treat-
ment groups for the experiments with 20 mice in each group: control
group, the UVB group, and the GTPs⫹UVB group. GTPs were given
in the drinking water as the sole source of drinking water to the mice
and continued during the entire photocarcinogenesis protocol. In
addition, the mice administered GTPs were switched to GTPs in the
drinking water 14 d before the initiation of the photocarcinogenesis
protocol. This protocol was employed as described previously (9);
mice were irradiated every day with UVB (180 mJ/cm2) for a total of
10 d to stimulate tumor initiation (the tumor initiation stage). One
week after the last UVB exposure of this tumor initiation stage, the
mice were again irradiated with the same dose of UVB 3 times/wk
(tumor promotion stage) for a total of 24 wk.

Antibodies and chemicals. Monoclonal antibodies for CD31
(PECAM-1), a secondary antibody conjugated to phycoerythrin
(PE)-Cy5, ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugated CD8 (Ly-2)
and anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were purchased
from BD Biosciences Pharmingen. Primary antibodies speciﬁc for
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9, tissue inhibitor of MMP
(TIMP1), and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) were pur-
chased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. The antibody used to detect
activated caspase 3 was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology.
The diaminobenzidine substrate kit was purchased from Kirkgaard
and Perry. All other chemicals were of analytical grade and were
purchased from Sigma Chemical.

Administration of GTPs in drinking water. Puriﬁed GTPs, also
known as “Polyphenone E,” were obtained from Mitsui Norin. GTP
is a mixture of polyphenols, primarily (-)-epicatechin (11%), (-)-
epicatechin gallate (7%), (-)-epigallocatechin (9%), (-)-epigallocat-
echin-3-gallate (60%), (-)-gallocatechin gallate (5%), (-)-catechin
gallate (1%), and (-)-catechins (1%); it is ⬃98% pure and includes
2.9% moisture and 1.5% ash. To avoid autodegradation, GTPs were
kept in the refrigerator at 4°C and remain stable for at least 2 y (6,7).
GTP is readily soluble in water and is therefore easy to add to

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/12/2871/4669980
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

drinking water. GTP was given in normal drinking water (2 g/L) to
mice and provided in water bottles that were covered with aluminum
foil to avoid the possibility of light-induced alterations in the poly-
phenols, if any. The water was changed at least 3 times/wk. The dose
of GTPs (2 g/L) was selected on the basis of our earlier study in which
oral administration of GTP was found to prevent UVB induction of
markers of tumor promotion (11).

UVB irradiation of mice. Mice were UVB-irradiated as described
previously (9). Brieﬂy, dorsal skin was exposed to UV radiation from
a band of 4 UVB lamps (Daavlin, UVA/UVB Research Irradiation
Unit) from which short wave lengths of UV (⬍290 nm) not normally
present in natural solar light were ﬁltered out using Kodacel cellulose
ﬁlm (Eastman Kodak). The majority of the resulting wave lengths
after Kodacel ﬁlm ﬁltration were in the UVB (290 –320 nm) and
UVA range with peak emission at 314 nm. The UVB emission was
monitored regularly before each UV irradiation with an IL-1700
phototherapy radiometer equipped with an IL SED 240 detector
(International Light). All UVB exposures were of 180 mJ/cm2.

Evaluation of tumor formation. During the experimental proto-
col, UVB-irradiated dorsal skin area of the mice was examined for
papillomas or tumor on a weekly basis. Growths ⬎ 1 mm in diameter
that persisted for at least 2 wk were deﬁned as tumors and recorded.
Tumor data on each mouse were recorded until their yield and size
stabilized. At that time point, the dimensions of all of the tumors on
each mouse were recorded. Tumor volumes were calculated using the
hemiellipsoid model formula: tumor volume ⫽ 1/2 (4␲/3) (l/2) (w/2)
h, where l ⫽ length, w ⫽ width, and h ⫽ height, as described earlier
(9). The tumors were then harvested and either snap-frozen in liquid
nitrogen or embedded and frozen in OCT medium for further exam-
ination.

Immunohistochemical analysis of expression of MMP-2 and
MMP-9. Sections (5 ␮m thick) were obtained from the parafﬁn-
embedded tissues and subjected to a heat-induced antigen retrieval
protocol by boiling with citrate buffer (pH 6.0) in a microwave oven
for 15 min. After washing in PBS, nonspeciﬁc staining sites were
blocked by incubation with 5% goat serum. The sections were then
incubated with either mouse monoclonal antibody for MMP-2 or
MMP-9 for 2 h at room temperature followed by incubation with a
secondary horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibody for 1 h. After
washing, the sections were incubated with a diaminobenzidine per-
oxidase substrate and counterstained with either methyl green or
hematoxylin and eosin.

Gelatinolytic zymography. The activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9
proteins in skin or tumor homogenates was analyzed by gelatinolytic
zymography using SDS-PAGE as described previously (12). Brieﬂy,
the samples (30 – 40 ␮g protein) were resolved on a gel copolymerized
with 0.1% gelatin using electrophoresis. After electrophoresis, the
gels were washed to remove the SDS. The gels were rinsed twice with
zymogen activation buffer and then incubated for 18 h at 37°C in the
same buffer. After washing, the gels were stained for 2 h with
PhastGel Blue R stain as described by the manufacturer.

Assessment of expression of vascular endothelial cell antigen,
CD31. Frozen sections (5 ␮m thick) were ﬁxed in cold acetone for
10 min. Nonspeciﬁc binding sites were blocked in Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 7.6) containing goat serum (5%) and bovine serum albumin
(0.5%, wt/v). After blocking, the sections were incubated with mono-
clonal antibodies speciﬁc for CD31 in blocking buffer for 1 h. Anti-
body binding was detected by subsequent incubation of tissue sections
with streptavidin-PE-Cy5 secondary antibody for 1 h. The sections
were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 which stains nuclei. The
intensity of the staining was evaluated using a microscope equipped
for immunoﬂuorescence analysis. In addition, vascular peritumoral
density was assessed by localizing the staining.

Immunohistochemical detection of CD8ⴙ cytolytic T lympho-
cytes.
Immunoﬂuorescent staining was carried out as described for
CD31 except that a FITC-conjugated CD8 monoclonal antibody was
used.

Preparation of skin and tumor lysates for Western blotting. The
tumors and epidermal skin from the control group were used for lysate
preparation as described previously (13,14). The epidermis was sep-
arated from the whole skin as described earlier (15). Tissue samples
were pooled from 6 mice in each experimental group and lysates were

GREEN TEA INHIBITS ANGIOGENESIS IN SKIN TUMORS

2873

prepared as described previously (13). There were 3 sets of pooled
samples from each group, n ⫽ 3.

Western blot analysis was performed as described previously (14).
Brieﬂy, proteins (25–50 ␮g) were resolved on 10% SDS-polyacryl-
amide gel and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. After in-
cubation in blocking buffer for 1 h, the membranes were incubated
with the primary antibodies in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. The
blot was then washed with PBS and incubated with secondary anti-
body conjugated with horseradish peroxidase. Protein bands were
then visualized using the ECL detection system (Amersham Life
Science). To verify equal protein loading and transfer of proteins
from gel to membrane, the blots were stripped and reprobed for
␤-actin using an anti-actin rabbit polyclonal antibody.

Statistical analysis. Tumor

incidence in the UVB and
GTPs⫹UVB groups was compared by ␹2 analysis. Tumor multiplicity
data were analyzed using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, and tumor
volume was analyzed using ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test. Sta-
tistical analysis of tumor data was performed at the termination of the
experiment. A simple ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test was also used
to calculate the signiﬁcance of the data obtained from Western blot
analysis. To compare the intensity of different biomarkers in immu-
nostaining, at least 4 different areas from each section were selected
and the color intensity of positive cells was measured and quantiﬁed
using the OPTIMAS 6.2 computerized software program. Differences
with P ⬍ 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant.

RESULTS

GTPs prevent UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis. The
administration of GTPs in drinking water reduced UVB-in-
duced skin carcinogenesis in terms of tumor incidence (Fig. 1,
Panel A), tumor multiplicity (Fig. 1B), and tumor size (Fig.
1C) compared with mice not administered GTPs. Oral admin-
istration of GTPs resulted in a 35% (P ⬍ 0.05) lower tumor
incidence at the termination of the experiment at 24 wk (Fig.
1A). The mice that did not receive GTPs had a 100% tumor
incidence during wk 16 of tumor promotion, whereas the mice
administered GTPs did not have 100% tumor incidence until
the end of wk 24 (P ⬍ 0.05) when the tumor yield was
stabilized. Thus oral administration of GTPs inhibited UVB-
induced tumor multiplicity (63%, P ⬍ 0.005) compared with
the group exposed to UVB but not administered GTP (Table
1). Compared with the group of mice not administered GTPs,
the size of the tumors in the mice receiving GTPs was reduced
when determined in terms of total tumor volume/group (Table
1, 62%, P ⬍ 0.005), tumor volume/tumor-bearing mouse (Fig.
1C, 55%, P ⬍ 0.005) and mean tumor volume/tumor (Table 1,
38%, P ⬍ 0.05). The mice in the control group that were not
irradiated did not develop tumors within the 24-wk study
period. During the photocarcinogenesis protocol, body weights
and food and ﬂuid intakes did not differ among the 3 groups
(data not shown).

GTPs inhibit MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression while in-
creasing TIMP1 in tumors.
Immunohistochemical staining
revealed the presence of MMP-2 positive cells in the tumors of
mice administered UVB or GTPs⫹UVB, but they were rarely
observed in the control group (Fig. 2, Panel A). However,
there were fewer MMP-2-positive cells in the tumors of the
mice administered GTPs⫹UVB (P ⬍ 0.01) and their distri-
bution was more sporadic (Fig. 2A) compared with the UVB
group. Western blot analysis indicated a higher expression of
MMP-2 in UV-induced tumors compared with the epidermal
skin of the control group (Fig. 3, Panel A, P ⬍ 0.005) and
conﬁrmed the inhibition (P ⬍ 0.05) of MMP-2 expression in
the tumors of mice that were administered GTPs⫹UVB.
Analysis of the activity of the MMP-2 protein in the homog-
enates by gelatinolytic zymography (Fig. 3B) clearly indicated
that the activity was markedly inhibited in the mice admin-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/12/2871/4669980
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

FIGURE 1 Administration of GTPs (2 g/L) in drinking water inhibits
UVB-induced skin tumorigenesis in SKH-1 hairless mice. The tumor
data are presented in terms of the percentage of mice with tumors
(Panel A), the number of tumors per tumor-bearing mouse (Panel B),
and are plotted as a function of the weeks of treatment. The number of
tumors per tumor-bearing mouse (Panel B) and the tumor volume per
tumor-bearing mouse (Panel C) are shown as means ⫾ SD, n ⫽ 20 in
the UVB group and n ⫽ 13 in the GTPs⫹UVB group. Asterisks indicate
different from UVB alone, **P ⬍ 0.05; *P ⬍ 0.005.

istered GTPs⫹UVB compared with UVB alone. Similarly, the
administration of GTPs inhibited the activity of MMP-9 (ge-
latinase B) in the tumors (Fig. 3D; P ⬍ 0.001), and also
inhibited MMP-9 protein expression as determined by immu-
nostaining (Fig. 2B; P ⬍ 0.01) and Western blot analysis (Fig.
3C, P ⬍ 0.005) compared with the UVB group. The immu-
nohistochemical staining intensity of MMP-9 in the tumors
obtained from the mice of UVB group was higher (P ⬍ 0.001)
than that in control skin; however, the MMP-9 staining in the
tumors obtained from the mice administered GTPs⫹UVB was
widely scattered and fainter than the staining pattern of the
tumors obtained from the UVB group. Further, administration
of GTPs (GTPs⫹UVB group) resulted in an ⬃200% increase

2874

MANTENA ET AL.

induced angiogenesis, tumor growth, and metastasis thus iden-
tiﬁes VEGF as a promising target for antitumor therapy
(20,21). Western blot analysis revealed that UVB-induced
tumors overexpressed VEGF compared with normal skin bi-
opsies and that oral administration of GTPs inhibited the
expression of VEGF in the UVB-induced tumors (Fig. 5, Panel
A, P ⬍ 0.005).

GTPs inhibit PCNA expression in tumors. The expres-
sion of PCNA is an indicator of the proliferative activity of
tumor cells. Western blot analysis indicated that the levels of
PCNA were higher in the UVB-induced tumors than in the
skin biopsies of control mice (Fig. 5B). Administration of
GTPs inhibited the enhancement of the expression of PCNA
in the UVB-induced tumors (P ⬍ 0.005).

GTPs increase the numbers of cytotoxic T lymphocytes in
skin tumors. Because cytotoxic T cells (CD8⫹ cells) are
tumoricidal in nature, we determined whether administration
of GTPs induces the recruitment of cytotoxic T lymphocytes
to the tumor site using immunoﬂuorescence analysis. The
intensity of ﬂuorescence staining and the number of CD8⫹ T
cells were higher in tumors treated with GTPs⫹UVB com-
pared with the UVB group of mice (Fig. 4B). These results
indicate another major pathway by which GTPs can inhibit
tumor growth.

GTPs induce the activation of caspase-3 in tumors. Be-
cause we observed that treatment with GTPs increased the
numbers of CD8⫹ T cells in the tumor microenvironment, and
these cells are cytotoxic to tumor cells, it is possible that the
tumor cells are undergoing apoptosis. Activation of caspase-3
is a terminal event in apoptotic cells. We found higher levels
of activation of caspase-3, as indicated by its cleavage in the
UVB-induced tumors of mice administered GTPs (Fig. 5C)
than in the mice with UVB-induced tumors or mice not given
GTPs. These data suggest that induction of cell death or
apoptosis mediated by the activation of caspase-3 in tumor
cells contributes to the inhibition of UVB-induced tumor
growth with administration of GTPs. The activation of
caspase-3 was not evident in the skin of the control group.

DISCUSSION

In our continuing efforts to develop effective dietary bo-
tanical supplements as chemopreventive agents for the pre-

TABLE 1

Photoprotective effect of GTPs on UVB-induced skin tumors

in mice at the end of the photocarcinogenesis protocol1,2

UVB
alone

GTPs ⫹

UVB

% Inhibition

Tumor-bearing mice/group, n
Total tumors/group, n
Total tumor volume/group, mm3
Mean tumor volume/tumor, mm3

20
362
9230
26 ⫾ 7

13
132*
3507*

16 ⫾ 4**

35
63
62

38 ⫾ 4

1 Values are means ⫾ SEM or n. Asterisks indicate different from

UVB alone: * P ⬍ 0.005, ** P ⬍ 0.05.

2 Number of tumors and tumor volume were recorded at 24 wk

when tumor yield and growth had stabilized.

in TIMP1, the naturally occurring inhibitor of these proteins
(Fig. 3E, P ⬍ 0.005) compared with UVB group; this may have
contributed to the inhibition of the expression of both MMP-2
and MMP-9 in these mice. Thus, our data suggest that one
mechanism by which the administration of the GTPs acts to
inhibit UVB-induced tumor formation is through inhibition of
the synthesis or secretion of MMP-2 and MMP-9 proteins,
thus curtailing the proangiogenic stimuli that promote tumor
growth (16 –19).

GTPs inhibit the expression of CD31 and VEGF in tu-
mors.
Immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of
CD31 indicated intense staining of the tumor cells in the mice
of the UVB group (Fig. 4, Panel A) which was greater than
that of control skin (P ⬍ 0.001). Staining of CD31 was weak
in the tumors of the mice administered GTPs⫹UVB (Fig. 4
A). Moreover, the staining pattern of CD31 in the tumor
tissue sections from mice of the UVB group revealed elongated
vessels that were often arranged in clusters (Fig. 4A). In
contrast, the CD31 staining pattern of the tumors in the mice
administered GTPs indicated inhibition of the peritumoral
vascular density and a reduction in the clusters and elongated
structures of vessels in tumors compared with the UVB group.
This suggests inhibition of the formation of new vasculature
and thus inhibition of tumor growth by GTPs.

The evidence supporting a central role for VEGF in tumor-

FIGURE 2 Oral administration of
GTPs to mice inhibits enhanced ex-
pression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the
UVB-induced skin tumors. Represen-
tative examples of micrographs of
staining ﬁgures for MMP-2 (Panel A)
and MMP-9 (Panel B) are shown from
experiments conducted in tumors or
skin samples from at least 6 mice that
had identical patterns. Arrows in Panel
A (UVB alone)
indicate the intense
presence of MMP-2⫹ cells, whereas
sporadic and less intense MMP-2⫹
cells were found in tumors of mice ad-
ministered GTPs⫹UVB. Scale bar ⫽ 50
␮m.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/12/2871/4669980
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

GREEN TEA INHIBITS ANGIOGENESIS IN SKIN TUMORS

2875

FIGURE 3 Oral administration of GTPs to mice inhibits enhanced expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in UVB-induced skin tumors while increasing the
expression of TIMP1. Epidermal skin samples from age-matched control mice that were not UVB-irradiated were included in this assay. The MMP-2 protein
expression was determined by Western blotting (Panel A) and its activity was assessed by gelatinolytic zymography (Panel B). Similarly, the expression of
MMP-9 was determined by Western blot analysis (Panel C), and activity by gelatinolytic zymography (Panel D); TIMP1 expression was examined by Western
blot analysis (Panel E). Representative examples of blots are shown from 3 sets of experiments. One set of experiment included the control, UVB, and
GTPs⫹UVB groups. The samples in each set were prepared by pooling the skin or tumors from 6 different mice that showed identical results each time,
n ⫽ 3. Asterisks indicate different from UVB alone, *P ⬍ 0.05, **P ⬍ 0.005.

vention of photocarcinogenesis, we assessed the efﬁcacy of oral
administration of GTPs. Using a mouse model, we found that
oral administration of GTPs resulted in signiﬁcant protection
against photocarcinogenesis in terms of tumor incidence, tu-
mor multiplicity, and tumor growth (Fig. 1, Table 1). This
degree of prevention was less than that reported for topical
application of EGCG (9). Presumably, this difference is asso-
ciated with the higher concentration of EGCG available in
the skin after topical application compared with oral admin-
istration. The chemopreventive effects we observed were ap-
preciable, however, and directly relevant because green tea is
commonly consumed as a beverage. Thus, administration of
GTPs as a beverage may serve as a complementary and alter-
native medicine for the prevention of skin cancer.

In an effort to deﬁne the pathways by which oral adminis-
tration of GTPs inhibits UV-induced skin carcinogenesis, we
examined biomarkers of angiogenesis, cellular proliferation,
and tumor cell death or apoptosis. The protein expression and
secretion of both MMP-2 and MMP-9 were markedly lower in

tumors from mice administered GTPs, and the activity of these
gelatinases also was reduced. The inhibition of MMPs was
accompanied by elevated expression of their natural inhibitor,
TIMP1. This suggests one mechanism by which GTPs inhibit
UV-induced tumor growth. These data are in concordance
with our previous study of in vitro treatment of human pros-
tate carcinoma cells (DU145) with (-)-epigallocatechin-3-
gallate (a major constituent of GTPs) in which we also ob-
served a downregulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 protein
expression as well as downregulation of their activities (12).
Furthermore, our in vivo tumor model revealed that adminis-
tration of GTPs in the drinking water inhibited the expression
of vascular endothelial cell antigens, such as CD31 and VEGF,
in the UVB-induced tumors. These proteins play an important
role in tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis due to their
promotion of the new vasculature formation that supports the
growth of the tumor. Thus, administration of GTPs in the
drinking water has a strong antiangiogenic effect and has the
potential to check the growth, or cause regression, of the

FIGURE 4 Oral administration
of GTPs in mice inhibits enhanced ex-
pression of vascular endothelial cell an-
tigen CD31, a marker of angiogenesis
(Panel A) and enhances the recruitment
of CD8⫹ T cells in UVB-induced tumors
(Panel B). Immunoﬂuorescence analysis
indicates reduced staining of CD31 (red)
and fewer CD31⫹ cells after oral admin-
istration of GTPs as well as a reduction
in the presence of clustering and elon-
gation of vessels as revealed by the
CD31 staining of the endothelial cells.
Arrows in Panel A indicate the presence
of clustering and elongation of the ves-
sels of CD31⫹ cells.
Immunoﬂuores-
cence analysis using FITC conjugated
anti-CD8 monoclonal antibody revealed
enhanced recruitment of CD8⫹ T cells
(green) in the tumors of the mice admin-
istered GTPs⫹UVB compared with the
UVB group (Panel B). Scale bar ⫽ 50
␮m.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/12/2871/4669980
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

2876

MANTENA ET AL.

istered GTPs. This indicates that the cells are undergoing
apoptosis (23,24) and could reﬂect apoptosis induced by the
activity of the cytotoxic T cells and/or a direct effect of the
GTPs. Similar studies were conducted with EGCG (a major
component of GTPs) in which the chemopreventive effect of
topical application of EGCG in a hydrophilic cream was
evaluated with an identical photocarcinogenesis protocol and
biomarkers of angiogenesis and cytotoxic T cells in tumors
(25). The degree of chemopreventive effect of GTPs was lower
than that with topical application of EGCG. Presumably, this
difference may be due to the higher concentration of EGCG
available in the skin with topical application compared with
oral administration of GTPs. However, the chemopreventive
effect of orally administered GTPs in mice was notable against
the biomarkers studied in this study; it can be considered as
important as EGCG because GTPs are affordable, less costly
than pure EGCG, and can be easily obtained from green tea
beverage for the prevention of UV-induced skin cancer and
other harmful effects of UV radiation. On the basis of the
information obtained in this study, it is suggested that the
daily consumption of 5– 6 cups (1 cup ⫽ 150 mL) of green tea
(1 g green tea leaves/150 mL) by humans may provide the
same level of GTPs in the in vivo human system and should
provide similar protection against harmful effects of UV radi-
ation. However, the magnitude of chemopreventive effect of
GTPs may differ from person to person due to differences in
race, and UV radiation intensity and exposure time.

In summary, our data suggest that GTPs can act to prevent
both UVB-induced skin carcinogenesis and the growth of the
tumors once established. They further indicate that GTPs can
act through at least 2 mechanisms in our in vivo tumor model
system: 1) inhibition of the proangiogenic stimuli, and 2)
promotion of cell death or apoptosis of the tumor cells. Thus,
green tea polyphenols have potential for development as a
complementary and alternative medicine to prevent UV-in-
duced nonmelanoma and melanoma skin cancers.

LITERATURE CITED

1. O’Shaughnessy, J. A., Kelloff, G. J., Gordon, G. B., Dannenberg, A. J.,
Hong, W. K., Fabian, C. J., Sigman, C. C., Bertagnolli, M. M., Stratton, S. P., Lam,
S., Nelson, W. G., Meyskens, F. L., Alberts, D. S., Follen, M., Rustgi, A. K.,
Papadimitrakopoulou, V., Scardino, P. T., Gazdar, A. F., Wattenberg, L. W.,
Sporn, M. B., Sakr, W. A., Lippman, S. M. & Von Hoff, D.
(2002) Treatment and
prevention of intraepithelial neoplasia: an important target for accelerated new
agent development. Recommendations of the American Association for Cancer
Research task force on the treatment and prevention of intraepithelial neoplasia.
Clin. Cancer Res. 8: 314 –346.

2. Miller, D. L. & Weinstock, M. A.

(1994) Nonmelanoma skin cancer in

the United States: incidence. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 30: 774 –778.

3. Urbach, F.

(1991)

Incidences of nonmelanoma skin cancer. Dermatol.

5. Katiyar, S. K. & Mukhtar, H.

Tea and chemoprevention of
cancer: epidemiologic and experimental studies (Review). Int. J. Oncol. 8: 221–
238.

(1996)

6. Katiyar, S. K.

(2003) Skin photoprotection by green tea: Antioxidant
and immunomodulatory effects. Current Drug Targets Immune Endocr. Metabol.
Disord. 3: 234 –242.

7. Katiyar, S. K. & Elmets, C. A.

(2001) Green tea polyphenolic antioxi-

dants and skin photoprotection. Int. J. Oncol. 18: 1307–1313.

8. Wang, Z. Y., Huang, M. T., Ferraro, T., Wong, C.-Q., Lou, Y.-R., Reuhl, K.,
Iatropoulos, M., Yang, C. S. & Conney, A. H.
Inhibitory effect of green
tea in the drinking water on tumorigenesis by ultraviolet light and 12-O-tetradeca-
noylphorbol-13-acetate in the skin of SKH-1 mice. Cancer Res. 52: 1162–1170.
(2003) Exceptionally
high protection of photocarcinogenesis by topical application of (-)-epigallocat-
echin-3-gallate in hydrophilic cream in SKH-1 hairless mouse model: relationship
to inhibition of UVB-induced global DNA hypomethylation. Neoplasia 5: 555–565.
10. American Institute of Nutrition (1980) Second report of the ad hoc

9. Mittal, A., Piyathilake, C., Hara, Y. & Katiyar, S. K.

(1992)

committee on standards for nutritional studies J. Nutr. 110: 1726.

Clin. 9: 751–755.

& Lowe, L.
Dermatol. 38: 681– 686.

4. Johnson, T. M., Dolan, O. M., Hamilton, T. A., Lu, M. C., Swanson, N. A.
(1998) Clinical and histologic trends of melanoma. J. Am. Acad.

FIGURE 5 Oral administration of GTPs in mice inhibits UVB-
induced expression of VEGF (Panel A) and PCNA (Panel B) while
increasing the activation of caspase-3 (Panel C). Activation of
caspase-3 is indicated by its cleavage. The band intensities relative to
␤-actin are shown under each blot. Epidermal skin lysates from the
control group were included in this assay. Representative examples of
blots are shown from 3 sets of experiments conducted. One set of
experiment includes control, UVB, and GTPs⫹UVB groups. The sam-
ples in each set were prepared by pooling the skin or tumors from 6
different mice that showed identical results each time, n ⫽ 3. *Different
from UVB alone group, P ⬍ 0.005.

tumors through this mechanism. Whether the GTPs affect the
expression of each of these proteins separately or target a key
molecule that regulates angiogenesis is yet to be resolved.

The inhibition of PCNA in the microenvironment of the
tumors supports the concept that the proliferation of the
tumor cells is suppressed. Again, this may reﬂect the action of
the GTPs on other mechanisms, such as angiogenesis or may
be a direct effect of the inhibitory action of GTPs. Such an
effect on the expression of PCNA would have the potential to
inhibit both UVB-induced carcinogenesis and growth of the
tumors once initiated.

CD8⫹ T cells are the effector cells in the cytotoxic response
of the host to UV-induced skin tumor cells; they play an
important role in protection against tumor immunity at least
for skin tumors induced by chronic UV exposure (22). The
ability of oral administration of GTPs to enhance the inﬁltra-
tion or recruitment of higher numbers of CD8⫹ T cells in the
tumor microenvironment may act to enhance the immunosur-
veillance that is mediated by these cells, thereby reducing the
incidence of tumors. It also has the potential to inhibit UV-
induced tumor growth and promote regression of developing
tumors. Finally, our studies established that the level of acti-
vation of caspase 3 was enhanced in tumors from mice admin-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/12/2871/4669980
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

GREEN TEA INHIBITS ANGIOGENESIS IN SKIN TUMORS

2877

18. Westermarck, J. & Kahari, V. M.

(1999) Regulation of matrix metallo-

proteinase expression in tumor invasion. FASEB J. 13: 781–792.

19. Sternlicht, M. D. & Werb, Z.

(2001) How matrix metalloproteinases

regulate cell behavior. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 17: 463–516.

20. Hanahan, D. & Folkman, J.

(1996) Patterns and emerging mechanisms

of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis. Cell 86: 353–364.

21. Schlaeppi, J. M. & Wood, J. M.

(1999) Targeting vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) for anti-tumor therapy, by anti-VEGF neutralizing monoclo-
nal antibodies or by VEGF receptor tyrosine-kinase inhibitors. Cancer Metastasis
Rev. 18: 473– 481.

22. de Gruijl, F. R.

(2002) Ultraviolet radiation and tumor immunity. Meth-

ods 28: 122–129.

23. Yang, J., Liu, X., Bhalla, K., Kim, C. N., Ibrado, A. M., Cai, J., Peng, T. I.,
Jones, D. P. & Wang, X.
(1997) Prevention of apoptosis by Bcl-2: release of
cytochrome c from mitochondria blocked. Science (Washington, DC) 275: 1129 –
1132.

24. Kluck, R. M., Bossy-Wetzel, E., Green, D. R. & Newmeyer, D. D.

(1997)
The release of cytochrome c from mitochondria: a primary site for Bcl-2 regulation
of apoptosis. Science (Washington, DC) 275: 1132–1136.

25. Mantena, S. K., Roy, A. M. & Katiyar, S. K.

(2005) Epigallocatechin-
3-gallate inhibits photocarcinogenesis through inhibition of angiogenic factors
and activation of CD8⫹ T cells in tumors. Photochem. Photobiol. DOI: 10.1562/
2005-04-11-RA-487.

11. Agarwal, R., Katiyar, S. K., Khan, S. G. & Mukhtar, H.

(1993) Protection
against ultraviolet B radiation-induced effects in the skin of SKH-1 hairless mice
by a polyphenolic fraction isolated from green tea. Photochem. Photobiol. 58:
695–700.

12. Vayalil, P. K. & Katiyar, S. K.

(2004) Treatment of epigallocatechin-3-
gallate inhibits matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 via inhibition of activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases, c-jun and NF-␬B in human prostate carcinoma
DU-145 cells. Prostate 59: 33– 42.

13. Vayalil, P. K., Elmets, C. A. & Katiyar, S. K.

(2003) Treatment of green
tea polyphenols in hydrophilic cream prevents UVB-induced oxidation of lipids
and proteins, depletion of antioxidant enzymes and phosphorylation of MAPK
proteins in SKH-1 hairless mouse skin. Carcinogenesis 24: 927–936.

14. Roy, A. M., Baliga, M. S., Elmets, C. A. & Katiyar, S. K.

(2005) Grape
seed proanthocyanidins induce apoptosis through p53, Bax and caspase 3
pathways. Neoplasia 7: 24 –36.

15. Katiyar, S. K., Challa, A., McCormick, T. S., Cooper, K. D. & Mukhtar, H.
(1999) Prevention of UVB-induced immunosuppression in mice by green tea
polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate may be associated with alterations in
IL-10 and IL-12 production. Carcinogenesis 20: 2117–2124.

16. Egeblad, M. & Werb, Z.

(2002) New functions for the matrix metallo-

proteinases in cancer progression. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2: 161–174.

(1999) MMP inhibition in prostate cancer. Ann. N.Y.

17. Lokeshwar, B. L.
Acad. Sci. 878: 271–289.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jn/article-abstract/135/12/2871/4669980
by University of Ottawa user
on 24 June 2018

