Public Health Nutrition: 4(2B), 499–515

DOI: 10.1079/PHN2001136

Healthy lifestyles in Europe: prevention of obesity and type II
diabetes by diet and physical activity

Arne Astrup*
Research Department of Human Nutrition, The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, Denmark.

Abstract
The prevalence of obesity is increasing rapidly in all age groups in most EU-countries
and is one of the fastest growing epidemics, now affecting 10–40% of the adult
population. Obesity increases the risk of serious co-morbidities such as type 2
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, certain cancers and reduced life expectancy, and
these complications may account for 5–10% of all health costs in EU countries. The
risk of diabetes is particularly increased by obesity, and 80–95% of the increase in
diabetes can be attributed to obesity and overweight with abdominal fat distribution.
There is robust evidence from cross-sectional and longitudinal studies to support that
an energy-dense, high fat diet and physical inactivity are independent risk factors for
weight gain and obesity. Furthermore, interaction between dietary fat and physical
fitness determine fat balance, so that the obesity promoting effect of a high fat diet is
enhanced in susceptible subjects, particularly in sedentary individuals with a genetic
predisposition to obesity.
Ad libitum consumption of diets low in fat and high in protein and complex
carbohydrates, with a low glycaemic index, contributes to the prevention of weight
gain in normal weight subjects. It also causes a spontaneous weight loss of 3–4 kg in
overweight subjects, and has beneficial effects on risk factors for diabetes and CVD.
To prevent obesity and diabetes there are grounds for
recommending the
combination of increasing daily physical activity level to a PAL-value of at least 1.8
and reducing dietary fat content to 20–25 energy-% in sedentary subjects, and to 25–
35% in more physically active individuals.

Keywords
Obesity
Type II diabetes
Diet
Physical activity
Genetics
Prevention

The burden of obesity and diabetes

The rapid increase in the global prevalence of obesity has
been characterised as an epidemic by the WHO1. In most
affluent populations the prevalence of obesity (cid:133)BMI .
30 kg=m2(cid:134) among adults is 10–40%. Overweight (cid:133)25 ,
BMI , 30 kg=m2(cid:134) affects an even larger proportion of the
population than obesity. Overweight carries in itself an
increased risk of the same complications as obesity and
the risk is particularly high with abdominal obesity. The
major complications are non-insulin-dependent diabetes
(NIDDM or type 2 diabetes),
ischaemic heart disease,
hypertension, stroke, certain cancers and physical dis-
ability, which together may account for 5–10% of all
health costs (Table 1).

Diabetes is the most important medical consequence of
obesity because it is common, has serious complications,
is difficult to treat, reduces life expectancy by 8–10 years
and is expensive to manage. Type 2 diabetes is rapidly
becoming one of the major non-communicable diseases
in the EU. It accounts for 80–90% of the existing 110
million diabetics worldwide, a number which is expected

fat distribution and obesity account

to reach 180 million by the year 20102. Overweight with
abdominal
for
perhaps 80–95% of cases of type 2 diabetes and remain
a major obstacle to the successful long-term management
of the disease3. Women with a BMI of 23–24 are at 4-fold
higher risk of type 2 diabetes than women with BMI , 22:
Women with a BMI of 24–25 have a 5-fold increased risk,
and those with BMI . 35 have a 93-fold increased risk, of
type 2 diabetes4 (Fig. 1). Recent weight gain adds further
to the risk of developing diabetes4. If body fat and fat
distribution are taken into account an even larger
proportion of diabetes cases can be explained by excess
fat deposition.

Although diabetes is not directly the cause of most of
the excess mortality among obese subjects, the metabolic
abnormalities underlying type 2 diabetes are clearly the
result of obesity (Fig. 2), which in itself predisposes to
hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Individuals with
type 2 diabetes are at a high risk of developing a range of
debilitating complications that can lead to disability and
premature death. Cardiovascular disease is a particular
problem for type 2 diabetics and 75% of deaths among

*Corresponding author: Email ast@kvl.dk

q The Author 2001

500

A Astrup

Table 1 Relative risk of health conditions caused by obesity1

Greatly increased
(relative risk @3)

Diabetes
Gall bladder disease
Hypertension
Dyslipidaemia
Insulin resistance
Breathlessness
Sleep apnoea

Moderately increased
(relative risk ca. 2–3)

Slightly increased
(relative risk ca 1–2)

Coronary heart disease
Osteoarthritis (knees)
Hyperuricaemia and gout
Asthma

Cancer (breast cancer in postmenopausal women,
endometial cancer, colon cancer)
Reproductive hormone abnormalities
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Impaired fertility
Low back pain
Increased anaesthetic risk
Foetal defects arising from maternal obesity

individuals with type 2 diabetes are due to coronary heart
disease. Such individuals experience a more than doubled
risk of heart attack or stroke. Individuals with diabetes are
at 17 times greater risk of peripheral vascular disease
leading to amputation than non-diabetics2. Nephropathy
can be seen in 8% of patients at the time of diagnosis and
occurs in 40% of individuals who have had diabetes for 20
years. At diagnosis 25% of individuals with type 2 diabetes
have already undergone changes to the retina, and about
2% of the diabetic population is blind.

Some of these defects are reversible with weight loss,
with a corresponding improvement
in mortality. In a
Swedish weight loss intervention study on obesity the 2-
year incidence of diabetes was 6.3% in the control group
and only 0.2% in the weight loss group5. This intervention
study shows that .95% of new cases of type 2 diabetes
among obese individuals can be prevented by a sustained
weight loss5. Most of the benefit was maintained at 10
years when the incidence of diabetes was still 5-fold
lower than in controls, which corresponds to an 80%
protection against developing diabetes6. In overweight
diabetics the excess mortality is reversed by a 15–20%
weight loss in the first year after diagnosis7. A deliberate

weight loss of 0.5–9.0 kg is associated with a 30–40%
reduction in diabetes related mortality8 (Fig. 3).

Secular trends in obesity and diabetes in EU

The prevalence of diabetes and the number of people
affected by the disease in the EU is increasing rapidly.
Causes are changes in ethnicity, the size of the popula-
tion, sex distribution, age structure, degree of urbanisa-
tion, and the increasing prevalence of overweight and
obesity. Even without taking the expected impact of the
obesity epidemic into consideration the increase in the
prevalence of diabetes and the number of individuals
affected in the first quarter of the 21st century is predicted
to increase epidemically9. In the developed countries
there will be a 27% increase in the prevalence of adult
diabetes, and a 42% increase in the number of people
from 1995 to 20259. For the EU the
with diabetes,
expected increases in the prevalence of diabetes and
the number of affected individuals are shown in Table 2.
These data are from 1995 and newer surveys suggest that
the prevalence of diabetes already exceeds the prediction
in certain countries. For example, in the U.K. a survey

Fig. 1 Relative risk of type 2 diabetes increases with greater body mass index (BMI) in women. A BMI . 35 kg=m2 increases the risk of
diabetes by 93-fold. The relation clearly demonstrates that
type 2 diabetes essentially does not occur in lean women with a
BMI , 22 kg=m24

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

501

Fig. 2 A model to explain the contribution of different environmental factors to the development of type 2 diabetes. Most factors seem to
exert their effect though an adverse effect of the enlarged body fat stores and of intraabdominal fat depositions in individuals with
susceptibility genes, which together with physical inactivity is markedly responsible for the increased predisposition to diabetes (Modified
from Astrup & Finer3)

from Manchester indicates that 10% of the adult population
is undergoing treatment for diabetes and that an even larger
proportion of the population would be classified as having
type 2 diabetes if the newly revised WHO criteria are
applied (Kennedy Cruickshank, personal communication).

factors, e.g. fetal programming. Weight gain and obesity
develops
in susceptible individuals when they are
exposed to a lifestyle characterised by physical inactivity
and an abundant availability of energy dense, high fat,
palatable foods. The importance of these factors will be
reviewed.

Pathogenic mechanisms

It
is generally accepted that obesity develops on the
background of a genetic predisposition and increased
susceptibility may be developed by interaction with other

The role of diet composition and energy density
The abundant food energy supply in the majority of
populations has removed limited energy availability as a
restricting factor for the development of obesity. The

Fig. 3 Intentional weight loss results in significantly reduced mortality rates for women with obesity related health problems. Mortality in
obese type 2 diabetics was reduced by 44% with an intentional weight loss of 1–19 lb (0.5–9 kg) (Modified from Williamson et al.8)

502

A Astrup

Table 2 Estimated prevalence of population type 2 diabetes,
numerical estimates, and projections in countries in the European
Union from 1995 to 20259

Country and year

Prevalence (%)

(000)

Number of people

proliferation of cheap, highly palatable, high fat, instant,
fast and pre-packaged foods is assumed to contribute to
overconsumption and to divest consumers of control over
the preparation of their own foods.

Austria
1995
2000
2025
Belgium
1995
2000
2025

Denmark

1995
2000
2025
France
1995
2000
2025

Germany

1995
2000
2025
Greece
1995
2000
2025
Iceland
1995
2000
2025
Ireland
1995
2000
2025

Italy

1995
2000
2025

Luxembourg

1995
2000
2025

Netherlands

1995
2000
2025
Norway
1995
2000
2025

Portugal

1995
2000
2025

Spain

1995
2000
2025
Sweden
1995
2000
2025

UK

1995
2000
2025

2.0
2.1
2.7

2.1
2.2
2.7

8.3
8.4
10.8

2.1
2.1
2.6

2.1
2.2
2.8

7.6
7.8
9.6

7.0
7.8
9.3

1.8
1.8
2.3

7.5
7.8
10.0

2.0
2.1
2.7

1.9
2.0
2.7

8.6
8.6
10.2

7.1
7.3
8.8

7.2
7.3
9.5

9.3
9.4
11.2

2.1
2.1
2.5

123
130
178

164
171
221

329
335
428

881
935
1,234

1,359
1,434
1,770

607
650
772

13
14
23

43
46
66

3,369
3,592
4,365

6.2
6.8
9.3

222
242
354

276
280
363

513
538
674

2,156
2,303
2,952

614
631
827

912
934
1,186

that

in their metabolic effects,

Regulation of the macronutrient balances
The traditional concept of the energy balance equation,
which describes weight gain as an excessive positive
energy imbalance, can usefully be replaced by a series of
macronutrient balance equations in which gains in body
fat stores are viewed specifically as an imbalance of fat.
The background for this replacement is that Joules are not
equal
interconversion
between the 4 macronutrients is negligible, and that an
oxidative hierarchy operates in inverse proportion to the
size of available stores for each macronutrient. However,
an excessive carbohydrate ingestion can lead to increased
fat deposition by suppressing lipolysis and fat oxidation.
Amino acid, glucose and alcohol oxidations adjust readily
to protein, carbohydrate, and alcohol intakes. Seen over a
period of a few days, regulation appears to be geared
primarily to the suppression of hunger through gastro-
to the maintenance of appropriate
intestinal signals,
glycogen reserves and,
to the
maintenance of body fat stores.

to a lesser extent,

Alcohol is most readily oxidised because it cannot be
stored. Oxidation of carbohydrate and protein are also
under tight auto-regulatory feedback control: oxidation
increases in direct response to intake. In contrast, there is
virtually no acute feedback between fat intake and fat
oxidation. Fat oxidation is primarily a function of the gap
between total energy expenditure and the amount of
alcohol, protein and carbohydrate energy consumed,
resulting in a much less accurately maintained fat balance.
Though regulatory responses serving to achieve fat
balance exist, their effectiveness in inhibiting the expan-
sion of
the fat mass seems to be limited. Leptin, a
hormone secreted from adipose tissue at an increased rate
when the fat mass is expanded, inhibits food intake and
increases sympathetic nervous system activity through a
central action. However, the 10-fold higher circulating
leptin concentrations in obese than in lean subjects
suggest
to
restrict energy intake in obese individuals. Long-term fat
and energy balances tend to remain close to zero over
prolonged periods once a weight maintenance plateau
has been reached (i.e. less than 2–3% error relative to
energy turnover considered over one year).

lipostatic mechanisms are insufficient

that

In conclusion, protein, carbohydrate and ethanol
oxidation rates relate well to the respective intake of
these nutrients. Dietary fat oxidation, however, relates
poorly to daily variations in fat consumption. This is a
probable explanation as
to why obesity develops
particularly among individuals with a genetically deter-
mined low fat oxidation capacity when the diet is high in
fat and when physical activity is limited.

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

503

Role of diet composition in obesity and risk factors
The establishment of a causal link between exposure to a
diet component and weight gain and obesity should be
based on all the available lines of evidence, i.e. feeding
studies in experimental animals, observational cross-
sectional and longitudinal human studies, short-term
experimental and mechanistic studies and intervention
studies10. These lines of evidence will be reviewed briefly.

X Experimental studies on diet composition and
energy intake. Considering the problem of weight gain
and obesity, the issue is to determine the nature of the
dietary components which facilitate consumption and
lead to a positive energy balance. Dietary components
can influence energy intake by acting during consump-
tion and in the period following eating (post-ingestive
period). Dietary protein exerts a potent effect on satiety
and provides the strongest inhibition of energy intake.
Delivered in iso-energetic amounts, high protein meals
generate stronger satiety than high carbohydrate meals.
An active area of interest involves comparisons of fat and
carbohydrate. Subjects exposed to high fat foods for a
period of weeks tend to overconsume energy. This effect
depends largely on the high energy density of the high fat
foods. The overeating effect has been referred to as
passive overconsumption11,12. It should be noted that the
stimulatory effect of fatty foods on energy intake is not
only due to their high energy density but also to the
probable facilitatory action of fat in the mouth. It has been
known for many years that offering subjects high fat or
high carbohydrate foods which have been manipulated to
be equally energy dense eliminates the high fat overeating
phenomenon in normal, non-genetically predisposed
individuals.

The passive overconsumption effect of fat on energy
intake is due to an action during consumption (it is an
intra-meal effect). The large amounts of
fat energy
consumed do not appear to generate equivalent effects
on post-ingestive satiety12. Therefore fat has a propor-
tionally weaker effect on satiety relative to the amount of
energy consumed. In studies where energetically equiva-
lent preloads of fat and carbohydrate have been delivered
it appears that fat does exert a weaker satiating effect (on
a Joule for Joule basis) than the other macronutrients.

A large body of short-term studies on appetite and
energy intake unequivocally show that fat is less satiating
than carbohydrate and protein when compared Joule for
Joule, and that high fat foods are more likely to induce
passive overconsumption and weight gain than low fat
foods13,14.

X Observational studies linking diet composition
with obesity. Numerous cross-sectional studies have
clearly demonstrated positive associations between the
proportion of total energy intake covered by fat and body
fatness, and inverse associations between carbohydrate

intake is difficult

and body fatness13,14. In contrast, a number of long-
itudinal studies have been unable to establish any
association between self-reported dietary fat and carbo-
hydrate intakes and subsequent weight change. However,
evidence based on observational studies looking for
associations between habitual dietary macronutrient
intakes and body fatness have a number of limitations
due to their reliance on information about dietary intake
given by the subjects under examination. Valid informa-
tion on dietary fat
to achieve in
populations that are recommended to reduce fat intake,
because they may either eat a more healthy diet during
the dietary survey or they may under-report fat intake.
Furthermore, because fat oxidation is not increased in
response to acute increases in fat
intake day-to-day
fluctuations in dietary fat intake, which are not captured
by reporting average fat intake, could lead to episodic
bouts of fat storage. It is well established that overweight
and obese subjects under-report their energy intake by
30–40% (Fig. 4), and fat may be over-represented in this
under-reporting15. Studies in health conscious popula-
tions show that high fat foods are under-reported whereas
low fat foods are over-reported. It seems to be easier to
demonstrate associations between dietary fat intake and
subsequent weight changes in less health conscious
populations such as in China, than in it is in the EU and
the United States.

One may therefore question the validity of the dietary
surveys reporting a decrease in fat consumption in the
population. The surveys’ estimates of dietary fat energy-%
in U.S.A. show a decrease from 42% in 1965 to 37% in 1987,
whereas per capita values of fat intake and dietary fat
energy-% based on food availability increased from 42 to 43
energy-% in the same period. Although the food disap-
pearance data does not include some types of food losses
and waste (e.g., trimming fat from meats), and commodities
used in pet foods are not subtracted from the total amounts
available in the food supply,
the increasing lack of
agreement is strongly suggestive of a substantial under-
reporting of dietary fat in the surveys. This is not surprising
as one would expect subjects to report more healthy eating
habits when asked to give information to nutrition experts.
Moreover, the well described under-reporting of energy
and fat consumption among obese subjects may have extra
significance in surveys conducted in a population where
the majority are either overweight or obese. Recent
statistics actually demonstrate that fat consumption in the
USA has not declined16.

In conclusion, cross-sectional studies quite consistently
support that a high fat, low carbohydrate diet contributes
to the maintenance of the obese condition. However the
consistent outcome should not be given major weight in
the assessment of the dietary fat and body fat relationship
because of the methodological limitations in obtaining
valid information about dietary macronutrient intakes in
diet conscious and overweight populations.

504

A Astrup

Fig. 4 Energy expenditure (energy requirements) of normal weight, and obese subjects. Relationships between body weight and energy
requirements assessed by measurement of energy expenditure or by apparent energy intake during weight stability. The growing under-
reporting with increasing body fatness makes the self-reported energy intake invalid for estimation of energy requirements in obese
individuals50

low fat, high carbohydrate diet

X Intervention studies. Randomised, controlled, ad
libitum,
intervention
studies, with control groups maintaining their usual diet
or consuming a medium to high fat diet, show mean
weight losses in the intervention groups over a period of
3–6 months ranging between 0 and 10 kg. This large
variability and inconsistent outcome has created doubt
about the effectiveness of a low fat diet in the prevention
and treatment of overweight and obesity, and questioned
the role of dietary fat in body fatness. Willett et al. have
stated that ‘Diets high in fat do not appear to be the
primary cause of the prevalence of excess body fat in our
society, and reductions in [dietary] fat will not be the
solution’ and ‘in the longer term, fat consumption within
the range of 18–40% appears to have little if any effect on
body fatness’17. One must admit
loss
achieved by a low-fat diet in some of the randomised
clinical trials is so modest that it is difficult to imagine how
a severely obese subject can benefit from a reduction in
dietary fat. However, the suggestion that saturated fat
should be replaced by monounsaturated fat rather than by
carbohydrate may pose the risk that
fat
consumption, which already exceeds the recommended
level, may be further increased.

the current

that

the weight

Trials assessing the effect of ad libitum low fat diets on
body weight may suffer from uncertainties about adher-
ence to the diet composition, but
the data may be
improved by taking factors such as pre-treatment body
weight, reduction in dietary fat and compliance into
consideration. A recent systematic review concluded that
dietary fat does play an important role in human obesity.
Based on 28 intervention trials Bray and Popkin found
that a reduction of 10% in the proportion of energy from
fat was associated with a reduction in weight of 16 g/d,
which corresponds to a weight loss of 2.9 kg over 6
months13. Our recently conducted meta-analysis includ-
ing data from 18 controlled, ad libitum, low fat, 2–12
months trials on weight change involved 1728 normal and

loss

overweight individuals of both gender14. The analysis
showed that a reduction in dietary energy from fat over
2–12 months is associated with a spontaneous weight loss
of 2.5 kg (95-% CI, 1.5–3.5; P , 0:0001(cid:134) more in the
intervention than in the control group (Fig. 5). The
analysis indicated that only minor weight loss occurred in
groups with body weights in the normal range (60–
72 kg), but
this group did not experience the slight
weight gain seen in the control groups consuming normal
fat diets. Weight
increased progressively with
increasing initial body weight. If extrapolated to a body
weight of 88 kg (corresponding to a BMI ,30 kg/m2),
and assuming a 10%-point fat reduction from a typical
habitual reported dietary intake of 38% energy from fat,
the predicted weight loss would be 4.4 kg (95-% CI, 2.0 to
6.8 kg). Another meta-analysis used more liberal inclu-
sion criteria and was based on 37 dietary intervention
studies published from 1981 to 199718. The weight loss in
the intervention groups was 2.79 kg larger than in the
control groups, and there was a highly significant
relationship between reduction in dietary fat and weight
loss, so that for every 1% decrease in energy from fat there
was a 0.28 kg decrease in body weight over a couple of
months.

These analyses show that a reduction in dietary fat
without restriction of total energy intake causes weight
loss in a dose-dependent
fashion and may produce
weight stability in normal weight subjects, and a modest
but clinically relevant weight loss in overweight subjects.
The dose-dependent relationship between the reduction
in fat energy-% and weight change found in these meta-
analyses is important because it shows that there is a
progressive effect on body weight when dietary fat
content is reduced down to 15–20% fat energy (Fig. 6).
This is also reflected in the FAO recommendations19:
‘Depending on their activity level and dietary pattern
adults should receive between 15% and 35% of their
Joules from fat’. Although it may not be realistic to reduce

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

505

Fig. 5 Meta-analysis of weight loss produced by ad libitum low fat, complex carbohydrate rich diets from 16 studies lasting more than 2
months in normal weight and overweight subjects. Estimated differences in weight change (intervention minus control) (kg) with 95%
confidence intervals. The estimates and 95% confidence intervals from the fixed effects and random effects meta-analysis are also shown14

dietary fat to less than 20% in EU populations, the 20%
may be a requisite to prevent weight gain in sedentary
individuals.

X Importance of carbohydrate source and glycae-
mic index for obesity and risk factors. Carbohydrates
contribute markedly to the satiating efficiency of foods
and exert clear effects on satiety. This forms part of the
‘glucostatic’ mechanism of appetite control. A variety of
carbohydrates, including glucose, fructose, sucrose and
maltodextrins, exert fairly similar effects on satiety - when
given in a pre-load they suppress later intake by an
amount roughly equivalent to their energetic value. The
time course of the suppressive action may vary according
to the rate at which the high carbohydrate loads are
metabolised, as demonstrated by the amylose content of
starch. There is also some evidence that the degree of
satiety is related to the glycaemic index of the carbohy-
drate in the food20. Resistant starch (dietary fibre) may
prolong satiety by modulating the time course of the pre-
and post-absorptive satiety signals. Fibre can also limit
intake by lowering the energy density of the food, thus
allowing time for satiation (and early satiety signals) to
occur before large amounts of energy have been
consumed.

The relative contributions of the carbohydrate sources
in the diet have therefore potential implications for body
weight regulation and obesity. The intake of alcohol and

protein has remained relatively constant
in most EU
countries over the last 50 years and together these
nutrients represent
less than 20% of the total energy
intake. The main dietary change has been the increase in
fat intake at the expense of carbohydrates. The inverse
relationship between dietary fat and carbohydrate has
been demonstrated in numerous cross-sectional studies in
countries with very different socio-economic status. It is
particularly the simple sugars, rather than the complex
carbohydrates, which tend to counterbalance the fat
energy of the diet. This phenomenon has been dubbed
‘fat-sugar see-saw’. Cross-sectional observational studies
have quite consistently shown a negative association
between body weight and the proportion of dietary
carbohydrate,
in particular simple sugars. One of the
largest data sets is derived from the Scottish part of the
Monica Survey and clearly shows an inverse relationship
between sugar intake and obesity21. When divided into
quintiles according to the fat:sugar ratio, there was a 2–3
fold higher prevalence of obesity in the highest versus the
lowest quintile. One of
the shortcomings of cross-
sectional surveys is the possibility that the dietary pattern
may represent a post-hoc event, i.e. that obese individuals
have adopted a particular diet composition consequent to
their obesity. For example, if obese subjects in an effort to
reduce their energy intake have replaced sugars with
artificial sweeteners their sugar
intake will be low.
Experimental studies and short-term intervention studies

506

A Astrup

Fig. 6 Meta-analyses of relationship between reduction in dietary fat content and spontaneous reduction in body weight. Each dot
represents a study. Upper panel14. Lower panel18

do not provide a firm conclusion as some studies suggest
that low fat, high sugar diets may increase energy intake
above that of a similar low fat diet with a high complex
carbohydrate content22. The only available long-term
study is the European multicenter trial CARMEN23. In that
study 398 overweight and obese adults with a BMI
between 26 and 35 were randomised to a dietary
intervention of either a low fat, high simple carbohydrate
diet, a low fat, high complex carbohydrate diet, or to
continuation of the control diet. The diets were supplied
by a validated laboratory shop system. A diet low in fat
and with an increased level of complex carbohydrates
lowered body fat mass by 2.4 kg more than the control
diet. To a lesser extent it also reduced fat mass compared

to the control diet (1.9 kg). Though the difference in
weight loss between complex and simple carbohydrate
groups was not statistically significant, it is possible that
the low fat, simple carbohydrate diet
is slightly less
effective in inducing weight loss. It should be noted that
there was no difference in energy density between the
two low fat diets in the CARMEN study. Given the
important role of energy density in passive overconsump-
tion the introduction of low fat, low moisture content
foods, such as cakes and biscuits in which fat
is
substituted by simple sugars but energy density is
unchanged, may impair the expected decrease in energy
intake and hence play a role in maintaining excess body
weight in some subjects.

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

507

fat

is an independent

X Diet composition and prevention of diabetes.
Prevention of weight gain and obesity are key features in
the prevention of diabetes. However, apart from an effect
on body weight, diet composition also has effects on risk
factors associated with diabetes and its major complica-
tions. There is even some epidemiological evidence to
support that the consumption of high-glycaemic index
diets
risk factor of developing
diabetes24,25. Some evidence is available for a differential
effect of carbohydrate sources on insulin resistance, on
blood lipids and on other cardiovascular risk factors. It is
often argued that a reduction in total
intake,
accompanied by a rise in carbohydrate intake, leads to a
rise in plasma triglycerides and a fall in plasma HDL-
cholesterol, which would be expected to increase the risk
of CHD. Furthermore it has been suggested that mono-
unsaturated fat (MUFA) has a more beneficial effect on
risk factors of CHD than carbohydrate. This is true in
studies where carbohydrate has been compared with
MUFA under strictly isoenergetic conditions and no
weight loss was allowed to occur on the low fat, complex
carbohydrate diet. But
in studies allowing ad libitum
intake the changes in blood lipids are dominated by the
slight weight loss induced by the low fat diet. This was
illustrated by Schaefer et al. in a study on hyperlipidemic
individuals where the dietary fat content was first
changed from 35 to 15 energy-% under isoenergetic
conditions so that body weight was kept constant26. After
6 weeks total cholesterol was reduced by 13% and LDL-
cholesterol by 17%, but HDL-cholesterol decreased by
23% and plasma triglycerides increased by 47%26. Subse-
quently the individuals continued for a further 10–12
weeks on an ad libitum diet of the same composition.
Now the diet caused a mean weight loss of 3.6 kg, a
further reduction in LDL-cholesterol, and the normal-
isation of plasma triglycerides and the ratio of HDL-
cholesterol/total-cholesterol. This has been confirmed in
a systematic review and meta-analysis evaluating the
effects of the American National Cholesterol Education
Program’s dietary interventions on major CVD risk
factors18 (evidence category A, see Table 327).

However, the carbohydrate source and the glycaemic
index may have importance for the effect on risk factors.
Both observational and intervention studies show that a
low glycaemic index diet exerts more beneficial effects
than a high glycaemic index diet on LDL- and HDL-
cholesterol, insulin resistance, and plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 activity. The glycaemic index may have
particular importance for determining HDL-cholesterol28.
Consequently, the high carbohydrate content of low fat
diets should stem mainly from the complex carbohydrates
of different vegetables, fruits and whole grains, which are
more satiating for fewer Joules than fatty foods, and are a
good source of vitamins, minerals, trace elements and
fibre. A high fibre content may further improve the
satiating effect of the diet and a diet rich in soluble fibre,

including oat bran, legumes, barley and most fruits and
vegetables, has the most beneficial effect on blood lipids
and blood pressure levels. The Nordic Dietary Recom-
mendations recommend a fibre intake of 25 to 30 grams
daily29, and 18 g/d (individual range 12–24 g/d) of non-
starch polysaccharides were proposed by the British
Panel on Dietary Reference Values30.

that

suggest

In conclusion, there is little evidence to support that
differences in carbohydrate source may be important for
body weight regulation and propensity to obesity. While
short-term studies
foods with a low
glycaemic index exert a stronger effect on satiety than
those with a high index, long-term studies are lacking and
the importance for body fatness is unknown. Changing
from a high fat, low carbohydrate diet to a low fat, high
carbohydrate diet with a low glycaemic index exerts
beneficial effects on risk factors of cardiovascular disease
and diabetes, while HDL-cholesterol may be lowered by
high glycaemic index diets (evidence category B).

X Dietary recommendations for individuals with
diabetes. According to the European Association for the
Study of Diabetes (EASD) the dietary guidelines for the
treatment of diabetes are very similar to recommendations
for obese subjects and for the prevention of diabetes,
except for a more liberal attitude to a higher total fat
content providing 10–18 of total energy-% derived from
cis-monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA)31. However, they
admit that whether increased MUFA fat intake in diabetics
inevitably leads to weight gain needs to be studied.
Carbohydrate containing foods, which are rich in soluble
fibre or have a low glycaemic index are especially
recommended31. Increased physical activity, even without
a weight loss, contributes to the prevention of type 2
diabetes, and given the effects on body fat and other
benefits more physical activity is an important part of the
recommendations.

X The role of protein for obesity and risk factors.
There is some concern that a high protein intake in infant
formulas and during growth may increase the suscept-
ibility to weight gain and obesity32. However, there is a
large body of experimental data to suggest that protein
possesses a higher satiating power per Joule in adults than
carbohydrate and fat. The impact on obesity and risk
factors of replacing carbohydrate with protein in ad
libitum low fat diets has been addressed in only one
randomised controlled trial. Two fat reduced diets (30% of
total energy), a high carbohydrate diet (protein 12% of
total energy) and a high-protein diet (protein 25% of total
energy) were compared in 65 obese individuals33. Weight
loss after 6 months was 5.1 kg in the high carbohydrate
and 8.9 kg in the high protein groups (cid:133)P , 0:01(cid:134); and
more subjects lost .10 kg in the high protein group
(35%) than in the high carbohydrate group (9%). The
protein rich diet had no adverse effect on blood lipids,

508

Table 3 Evidence categories27

A Astrup

Evidence Category

Sources of Evidence

Definition

A

B

C

D

Randomized controlled trials
(rich body of data)

Randomized controlled trials
(limited body of data)

Evidence is from endpoints of well-designed RCTs
(or trials that depart only minimally from randomization)
that provide a consistent pattern of findings in the population
for which the recommendation is made. Category
A therefore requires substantial numbers of studies involving
substantial numbers of participants.

Evidence is from endpoints of intervention studies that include
only a limited number of RCTs, post hoc or subgroup analysis
of RCTs, or meta-analysis of RCTs. In general, Category B
pertains when few randomized trials exist, they are small in size,
and the trial results are somewhat inconsistent, or the trials
were undertaken in a population that differs from the target
population of the recommendation.

Nonrandomized trials Observational trials

Evidence is from outcomes of uncontrolled or nonrandomized
trials or from observational studies.

Panel consensus judgment

Expert judgment is based on the panel’s synthesis of evidence
from experimental research described in the literature and/or
derived from the consensus of panel members based on
clinical experience or knowledge that does not meet the above-listed
criteria. This category is used only in cases where the provision of
some guidance was deemed valuable but an adequately compelling
clinical literature addressing the subject of the recommendation was
deemed insufficient to justify placement in one of the other categories
(A through C)

renal function or bone mineral density. Replacement of
some dietary carbohydrate by protein in ad libitum, low
fat diets may improve weight
loss. More freedom to
choose between protein rich and complex carbohydrate
rich foods may encourage obese subjects to choose more
lean meat and dairy products and hence improve
adherence to low fat diets in weight reduction pro-
grammes.

The consumption of meat and meat products has been
linked epidemiologically to cancers at different sites.
Ecological studies of diet and cancer have tended to show
a correlation between meat intake, particularly red meat,
and the risk of colo-rectal cancer, but more recent
European case referent studies have failed to show any
relationship34. The available evidence points to the intake
of protective factors such as vegetables and whole-grain
cereals being the main determinants of colo-rectal cancer
risk, with meat intake being only coincidentally related34.
The type, amount, processing, cooking and dose
responses of meat or protein responsible for the increased
risk of other cancers are uncertain, and the current
recommendation of a 140 g limit is a pragmatic value,
based on the distribution of meat
intake in the UK
population35.

for weight

In conclusion, the available evidence suggests that a
diet with a protein content up to 25 energy-% may be
beneficial
regulation in adults (evidence
category B). Protein allowances in diets for weight
reduction and for diabetics of up to 25 energy-% should
await confirmation of
the positive results by more
randomized trials.

X Fat quality. Although similar amounts of different fats
contain nearly the same amount of energy, differences
may exist in their satiating effects, which may influence
the total energy intake of ad libitum, low fat diets and
weight maintenance diets. From a biochemical and
physiological point of view fatty acids behave very
differently, and monounsaturated fats (MUFA) seem to
be more neutral than other fats in relation to insulin
resistance, type 2 diabetes, CHD and cancer. However,
animal studies suggest that MUFA increase body weight
more than polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA)36. In a
cross-sectional, observational study the highest positive
correlation was found between the intake of MUFA and
body fat mass, whereas no significant association was
found between PUFA and body fat, and only a weak
association to saturated fat was seen37. Two experimental
appetite studies have concordantly shown that meals/
infusions with MUFA produce lower satiety and suppress
energy intake for the remainder of the day less than
PUFA38. These preliminary reports suggest that a high
MUFA content
in the diet may promote passive over
consumption and obesity. Until randomised clinical trials
have been conducted some caution should be exercised
in recommending replacement of PUFA with MUFA in
diets for
individuals susceptible to weight gain and
obesity.

X Alcohol. The impact of alcohol
intake on weight
regulation is not well understood39. Observational epide-
miological studies addressing the relationship between
alcohol intake and obesity are probably more tenuous

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

509

than those addressing relationships with other dietary
factors, because the problems of under-reporting are
more severe. Surveys conducted in several different EU-
countries quite consistently show that non-drinkers are
more likely to be overweight and obese than individuals
that drink alcohol. However, there is an important gender
there is a slight positive
difference. Among males
association between alcohol
intake and body fatness,
while in females a strong inverse relationship is
suggested,
i.e. that the prevalence of obesity in non-
drinkers is 2 times higher than in those with the highest
alcohol intake. Neither suppressed intake of other foods,
higher levels of physical activity or enhanced thermo-
genic effect of alcohol seem to explain the apparent
reduced body weight of high alcohol consumers. The
discrepancy between the law of thermodynamics and the
epidemiological findings remains to be reconciled.

In the meantime a conservative view on alcohol should
be held: alcohol provides energy which is likely either to
displace, or to be additive to, more nutritious foods.
Alcohol suppresses fat oxidation, thereby allowing more
dietary fat to be stored. The satiating effect of alcohol
energy may be low and alcohol consumption has been
shown to promote passive over consumption of fat. High
alcohol consumption also increases the risk of losing
control over otherwise restrained behaviour. Conse-
quently, energy from alcohol should be limited.

Physical activity

Observational studies on physical activity and body fat
gain
Physical activity is a term used to describe all movement
produced by skeletal muscles which increases energy
expenditure, whether exercise or sport. At present daily
participation in moderate and vigorous physical activities
is low, and activity decreases with increasing age. There
has been a critical reduction in incidental lifestyle related
activity, resulting in reduced energy expenditure and
fitness in most populations in the last 30 years. There are
now fewer active jobs, greater reliance on motorised
transport, sedentary home entertainment, and labour-
saving devices at home, at work and in the shopping
environment. The small increases in moderate to vigorous
leisure time and sports activities are not sufficient
to
counterbalance this decrease. The development in young
people is of particular concern. Numerous cross-sectional
and longitudinal
studies have shown associations
between physical inactivity and obesity40. Prentice and
Jebb41 have shown that two indicators of inactivity (hours
per week of television viewing and number of cars per
household) are closely related to the current British
secular trend in obesity (Fig. 6). Furthermore, older
subjects tend to be more inactive than their younger
counterparts and this difference has been suggested to
contribute to obesity. It is supported by 10-year follow-up

data on females with a mean age of 46 from the NHANES-
I study where, at baseline and at follow-up, physical
activity was inversely related to body weight. Subjects
with a low physical activity level at follow-up were 3.8
times more likely to have gained .13 kg during the
preceding 10 years. Other prospective studies have found
that low levels of physical activity are associated with
weight gain and larger increases in waist circumference.
Cross-sectional studies have demonstrated that subjects
who regularly perform endurance exercise have less body
fat and trunk fat
than sedentary controls. Both the
exercise volume and fitness were inversely related to
total fat mass. Some studies have failed to confirm this
finding, but in larger cross-sectional studies, with controls
for more confounders, intra-abdominal fat measured with
computed tomography was inversely related to physical
activity. When the quantification of physical activity is
improved by measurement of total free living energy
expenditure by doubly labeled water technique, reduced
physical activity levels are seen to be associated with
increased body fat.

In a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of
controlled intervention studies, Fogelholm and Kukko-
nen-Harjula
concluded that exercise training only
reduced weight gain from 0.33 to 0.28 kg/month in
comparison with a sedentary control group. However, in
most of the studies the increase in energy expenditure
in physical activity (EEPA) was modest and the compli-
ance uncertain40. They concluded that an increase in
energy expenditure in sedentary individuals of approxi-
mately 6.3–8.4 MJ/week was associated with improved
weight maintenance. However, the amount of physical
activity necessary to prevent weight gain was not
identified. Schoeller et al. measured EEPA by doubly
labeled water in previously obese women and found that
a PAL (Total EE: RMR) of 1.9–2.1 was the threshold
required to exceed for weight maintenance42. This
corresponds to EEPA of 47 kJ/kg · d (Fig. 7), or 80 min/
d of moderate physical activity, or 35 min/d of vigorous
activity added to a sedentary lifestyle42. The threshold is
probably higher
in previously obese subject and in
individuals with increased susceptibility to weight gain
than in subjects without
this predisposition. There is
epidemiological evidence to suggest
the risk of
obesity increases sharply at a PAL of less than 1.80, which
should be taken into consideration when recommending
increased physical activity43. However, one should be
aware of the evidence for an interaction between dietary
fat content and physical activity, which suggests that less
physical activity is needed for those consuming a low-fat,
high-carbohydrate diet (see below).

that

Intervention studies on obesity and fat distribution
Uncontrolled studies suggest
that endurance training
reduces both body fat and abdominal fat, and that strength
training may cause a 10% reduction in intra-abdominal

510

A Astrup

factors. However, such estimates are potentially mislead-
ing because they may give the impression that most obese
have been genetically predetermined to their obesity, and
that changes in lifestyle factors may have little impact in
changing the increase in body weight11. However, these
estimates are highly dependent on the variation in
environmental obesity promoting factors. For instance,
in a highly sedentary study population, where almost all
subjects are uniformly sedentary, most variance between
the subjects in body fatness might be attributed to genetic
factors. How does this fit with the observed epidemic of
obesity, as it may be assumed that the gene pool has not
changed in this period of time? The obesity genes are
regarded as susceptibility genes, which are expressed and
become functional only when the individual is exposed to
a certain set of environmental factors, such as an energy
dense diet and a sedentary lifestyle. Currently, mono-
genetic obesity is extremely rare and the genetic influence
on obesity should be regarded rather as a predisposition
to body weight gain and obesity due to the presence of
alleles on several
the increased
susceptibility.

loci bringing about

Obesity is a classic example of a non-communicable
disease of complex multifactorial origin. One character-
istic is that it is caused not only by lifestyle and other
environmental factors, but also by genetic determinants.
There are important individual differences in responses to
various
lifestyle and environmental exposures, and
genetic factors play an important role in modulating this
responsiveness. Such genetically mediated sensitivity to
environmental exposure is referred to as gene-environ-
ment interaction. Food intake and physical activity are
examples of environmental factors that influence the risk
of obesity and diabetes. A lifestyle characterized by daily
physical activity and by the recommended diet is known
to reduce the risk of obesity and diabetes. These
population based recommendations do not
take into
account the large individual differences observed in the
response to changes in diet and physical activity and
assume that everybody responds in a similar manner.
However, several studies have shown that
there is a
considerable heterogeneity in the response in plasma
lipids to changes in dietary fat and in the response of the
indicators of cardiorespiratory endurance to regular
exercise. What
is generally considered an obesity
promoting and atherogenic diet may in reality pose little
risk for some segments of the population. In contrast,
what is considered a prudent diet for the majority of the
population may have little beneficial effect on a particular
segment of that population. The background for this
heterogeneity is currently only partly understood but
there is considerable evidence, both from studies of twins
and from molecular studies, to support that genes play a
role in this phenomenon. Genetic variations in several
candidate genes have been investigated for their potential
role in determining the response to diet change and

Fig. 7 Relationship between the free living energy expenditure
produced by habitual physical activity and subsequent gain of body
fat among a group of
females with increased susceptibility to
weight gain. The intercept with weight gain (cid:136) 0 indicates that
weight stability requires a daily energy expenditure of at least
47 kJ/kg body weight, which corresponds to an average of 80 min/
d of moderate activity or 35 min/d of vigorous activity added to a
sedentary lifestyle. (Modified from Schoeller et al.42)

adipose tissue without any notable decrease in body
weight or body fat. Studies combining diet and exercise
do not allow a separation of the effects of diet and
exercise. In a recent report on the treatment of over-
weight and obesity27 the following conclusions were
reached: (1) Physical activity contributes to weight loss,
both alone and in combination with dietary therapy
(evidence category A). (2) Physical activity contributes to
a decrease in body fat,
including a modest effect on
abdominal fat (evidence category B). (3) Physical activity
in overweight and obese adults increases cardiovascular
fitness independent of weight loss (evidence category A)
and (4) Physical activity reduces cardiovascular disease
risk factors and reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease
(evidence category C).

Conclusions
Observational cross-sectional and longitudinal studies
show that subjects with high levels of physical activity
have lower body fat and abdominal fat and are less likely
to gain total and abdominal fat than those with low levels
of physical activity (evidence category C). Randomised
controlled trials comparing exercise with no intervention,
and diet with diet plus exercise, are few, but the results
available show that increased physical activity prevents or
limits the gain of total fat and abdominal fat.

Genetics of obesity

Genetic susceptibility to obesity
It is well known that obesity tends to run in families.
Current family, twin and adoption studies have provided
strong evidence of a genetic influence on body weight
and obesity. Estimates have suggested that up to 80% of
the variance in body fatness may be attributed to genetic

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

511

regular physical activity. The majority of these studies
have been conducted with dietary fat as exposure factor,
and with blood lipids and lipoproteins as risk factor
variables, and they have shown that genetic variation in
several genes related to lipid metabolism (apolipoprotein-
apo A-1, apoA-IV, apo CIII etc.) is involved in modulating
the response to dietary fat. Appetite, energy intake and
energy balance as risk factor variables have not been
studied to the same extent, but a large number of
candidate genes for obesity and diabetes are currently
under investigation44.

The research on the obesity genes has brought an
increased physiological understanding of the regulation
of energy balance and body fat stores, and may be an
important tool for more specific and tailor made screen-
ing programmes, and for more specific preventive and
treatment options in the future.

The leptin system and candidate genes of obesity
Great progress has been made in the last 10 years in
identifying the genes that underlie most rodent models of
obesity and in understanding the role that these genes
play in the regulation of energy balance45. The discovery
of the lipostatic hormone leptin and its receptors brought
new hope for the imminent discovery of the causes of
human obesity. Although impressive progress has been
made in understanding the physiology of
the leptin
system, hopes that variations in this system might explain
an important part of the genetics of human obesity have
not been fulfilled. Mutations in both the leptin gene and
in its central receptor have been shown to cause severe
obesity in humans, but these cases are extremely rare.
However, treatment with exogenous leptin in a child with
congenital leptin deficiency has proven successful46. For
the most part obese humans appear to have normal leptin
and leptin receptor genes. Moreover, plasma leptin
concentrations in obese subjects are higher
than in
normal weight subjects, demonstrating the expected
increase in response to an increased fat cell mass. It is
likely that the prime role for leptin is the maintenance of a
sufficient size of
the fat stores for normal growth,
development and reproduction, rather than to protect
against an excessive enlargement of
fat stores. The
importance of other candidate genes is discussed later.

Breast-feeding
There is evidence to support that children who have not
received appropriate breast-feeding are at a higher risk of
weight gain and of childhood overweight and obesity.
The evidence category is only C, because the impact of
breast-feeding on the risk of childhood and adult over-
weight and obesity has been assessed in only a limited
number of studies. Three small studies with limited
statistical power failed to detect any association, while
two larger studies have found indications of a protective

effect of breast-feeding. These two studies found the
prevalence of obesity substantially lower in breast-fed
children than in children who had never been breast-fed.
In the largest study, involving 13345 German children, a
clear dose-response effect was found for the duration of
breast-feeding and prevalence of obesity47. The preva-
lence of obesity was 4.5% in children who had never been
breast-fed, 3.8% for 2 months of exclusive breast-feeding,
2.3% for 3–5 months, 1.7% for 6–12 months and 0.8% for
those who were breast-fed for more than 12 months. The
apparent protective effect of breast-feeding could not be
explained by differences in social class, education,
smoking or other lifestyle factors. Overall, these studies
suggest that the risk of obesity in children at the time of
school entry can be reduced by 30–40% if they are breast-
fed for 3–6 months as compared to no breast-feeding.
However,
these studies are of a purely observational
nature and do not allow any conclusion about causality.
Breast-feeding is closely related to education,
income,
social class and other lifestyle factors, which could also
have an important influence on childhood obesity, and
the causation therefore remains to be substantiated. A
number of hypothesis exist
to suggest mechanisms
linking breast-feeding to weight gain and obesity, but
this research is at an early stage. Breast milk contains
several bioactive factors not present
in formula milk,
which could contribute to metabolic programming.
Similarly,
from breast milk in
macro- and micronutrients composition. For instance,
infant formulas have a high protein content, which has
been suggested to promote an adipogenic development
in children at an early age.

formulas differ

infant

Despite some weaknesses in the evidence linking
breast-feeding to obesity (evidence category C), there
are several other health benefits of breast-feeding and a
possible protective effect against overweight and obesity
should be added to the list. Preventing obesity and its
complications may turn out to be an important argument
in the drive to encourage breast-feeding in European
countries.

Interaction between genes, dietary fat and physical
activity

Interactions between genes and fatty acids
There are many other possibilities in the pathways that
regulate food and energy intake, energy expenditure and
fat storage. Recent research has, among several genes,
focused on the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma (PPAR-g) gene. This gene produces two proteins,
one of which, PPAR-g is found in adipose tissue, where it
plays a key role in the regulation of adipocyte differentia-
tion. Activation of these receptors causes recruitment of
preadipocyte fibroblasts to form mature cells, which then
accumulate triglycerides. Polymorphisms and mutations
in the PPAR-g gene or the encoding region of the gene

512

A Astrup

have been associated with obesity and diabetes. The
endogenous PPAR-g ligands are fatty acids, eicosanoids
and prostglandins, which suggests the possibility that
hyperplasia might be induced by factors other than the
state of fullness of the existing adipocytes. These might
include certain dietary components such as specific fatty
acids, for example trans-fatty acids, which have been
linked to weight gain in prospective studies. A marked
increase has been observed in the ratio of n-6 to n-3 fatty
acids in the diets of most EU countries concomitant with
the rapid rise in the prevalence of obesity. It is possible
that such, so far unrecognized, dietary factors may prove
to be significant in the etiology of obesity.

Interaction between genes and dietary fat
The susceptibility to gain weight on high fat diets is highly
genetically determined in rodents. Recently, it has been
shown that the Mahogany gene seems to determine the
susceptibility of mice to become obese on a high fat
diet44. It is likely that the same phenomenon exists in
humans, but the role of the Mahogany gene remains to be
elucidated. Longitudinal studies have suggested that the
development of obesity is promoted by a high fat diet,
particularly in subjects with a familial predisposition to
obesity, which is probably genetically determined48. A
low ability to oxidise fat has been proposed as a
genetically determined trait which may be expressed
phenotypically as a positive fat balance when consuming
a high fat diet, which in turn may cause weight gain and
obesity14. Why does dietary fat only promote passive
overconsumption and weight gain in certain susceptible
individuals? This question remains to be answered, but
ongoing research finds it difficult to dissociate fat’s high
energy density from biochemical properties related to its
metabolism. Altered mechanisms involved in the parti-
tioning and oxidation of
fat may be important. Fat
oxidation rate is determined by the individual’s energy
requirement, energy balance, dietary fat content, physical
fitness, plasma insulin, estrogen levels and sensitivity,
circulating lipid substrates, skeletal muscle uptake, and
activity of oxidative enzymes49. After controlling for
dietary fat intake, energy balance and aerobic capacity,
fat oxidation rate has been shown to be a family trait with
a heritability of 30%. A low fat oxidation for a given
dietary fat content is a risk factor for subsequent weight
gain, and is prevalent among formerly obese subjects with
a family history of obesity. Strictly controlled metabolic
studies have demonstrated that the impaired oxidative
capacity of obese and post-obese subjects limits fat
oxidation, particularly post-prandially and during exer-
cise. Fat mobilisation through lipolysis is intact but
skeletal muscle uptake and oxidation is
restricted.
Possible responsible mechanisms are: altered responsive-
ness of
thyroid hormones and sympathetic nervous
system activity to a high fat diet, high insulin sensitivity,
low LPL-activity, and b-hydroxy-acyl-CoA-dehydrogenase

in the muscle fibres. The mechanisms linking low fat
oxidation and positive fat balance to the stimulation of
appetite and energy intake are poorly understood.

Interactions between genes and physical activity
Only few important genes have been discovered but a
number of likely susceptibility genes have been reported,
and they seem to predispose to obesity if a subject
possesses both alleles of a mutation or a polymorphism
from a couple of different genes of importance for body
weight regulation. The interaction with environmental
factors may be crucial for their expression. An example is
a polymorphism of the beta-2-adrenoceptor gene which,
in a Swedish study, was associated with obesity, whereas
a Danish study failed to find any association with body
weight and weight gain. A recent French study elegantly
demonstrated that the presence of the polymorphism did
not lead to obesity in physically active subjects, but in
those without regular physical activity the genotype was
associated with 7 kg higher body weight (2 BMI units)
and a larger waist circumference50. This is a nice example
of how a physiological system which, in the present case,
controls lipolysis (i.e. fat mobilization from the fat stores)
may be unaffected be a functional defect in a receptor if
compensatory mechanisms are in operation. In this case
exercise may have counteracted the defect by increased
activation of sympathoadrenal activity and post-receptor
sensitization to catecholamines.

Interactions between dietary fat and physical activity
The prevalence of obesity has, in a number of countries,
continued to rise despite a reduction in the proportion of
Joules from fat
in the national diets. Having been
observed in the U.S.A.
the phenomenon has been
named ‘The American Paradox’. Among the explanations
suggested for the apparent contradiction have been a
concomitant over-riding effect of decreasing physical
activity, overconsumption of highly palatable energy
dense, carbohydrate rich, low fat products, under-report-
ing of fat consumed in dietary surveys, and obesity being
an infectious disease caused by an adenovirus51. It should
be stressed, however, that a high dietary fat content is
unlikely to be the only environmental factor responsible
for obesity. A sedentary lifestyle with a low level of
energy expended on physical activities
is another
causative factor, which interacts with dietary fat content41.
This is emphasised in the studies by Stubbs et al. where
they demonstrated that even in non-obese individuals,
dietary fat tolerance is greatly lowered by a sedentary
lifestyle52,53. The result of this short-term study has been
extended by a meta-analysis of intervention studies on the
effect on weight
low fat diets alone and in
combination with exercise18. Weight loss achieved by low
fat diet alone was 2.8 kg, with diet and exercise combined
it was 5.7 kg. It should be noted that these studies were in

loss of

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

513

non-obese individuals. On a population basis the change
of a mean body weight of 5 kg may produce quite a
dramatic change in the prevalence of obesity11.

The decrease in physical activity observed in popula-
the
tion studies may,
continuing increase in the prevalence of obesity and the
very modest, if any, decrease in dietary fat intake is not
sufficient to retard this development.

therefore, be responsible for

The energy density of foods has been shown to play a
major role in the regulation of the spontaneous energy
intake, but macronutrient specific properties may also be
important in the propensity to major weight gain and
obesity. The propensity to gain weight on an energy
dense, high fat diet may be enhanced in sedentary
individuals54. In conclusion, the susceptibility to weight
gain is highly dependent on the daily level and pattern of
physical activity, and on the presence of obesity suscept-
ibility genes (evidence category B).

Can obesity be prevented?

implies that,

Individual differences in the responsiveness to chronic
alterations in energy balance induced by an obesity
promoting lifestyle appear to be ubiquitous. Variation in
many different genes contributes in important ways to the
response heterogeneity. The existence of these gene-
nutrient and gene-physical activity interaction effects with
a role in obesity and diabetes has considerable public
health implications. It
the
potential level of risk of obesity and its comorbidities can
be defined for the individual at the molecular level, and
that appropriate dietary factors and activity patterns may
be designed for the individual. Preventive medicine and
public health strategies could be developed for popula-
tion subgroups with an emphasis on high risk individuals.
One can anticipate that major advances will occur in the
next decade with identification of more of the genetic and
molecular causes of individual susceptibility to obesity
and diabetes.

in the future,

the effect of

There is evidence to support

the
recommendations of health and nutrition education
programmes (evidence category B). For example, a
school based intervention programme involving 4,171
pupils in the first grade in 2 counties of Crete managed to
produce a lower increase in BMI and beneficial changes
in blood lipids than in a control group over a 3 year
period55.

Preventive efforts should take into consideration that
the prevention of obesity is complex, involving physio-
logical, economic and social factors, and may interfere
with competing interests. A working group under The
International Obesity Task Force has developed an
integrated framework to illustrate the societal influences
on obesity prevalence (Fig. 8)56.

The diagram shows the factors that operate at similar
social structural levels labeled across the top. The most

common target for interventions to reduce obesity levels
is individual behaviour (shown to the right). The large
number of arrows
indicate the factors bearing on
individual behaviour, which challenges the notion of
individual ‘free will’ regarding food choice and energy
expenditure.

The School/Work/Home column represents the next
most common focus for intervention. Each of these sites is
influenced by factors further upstream. For example,
although schools can be a target for changing the food
supply or physical activity patterns of youth, they rarely
operate independently of external bodies:
funding
sources, accrediting bodies, and elected school boards
all have different agendas for school
function and
budgeting. The bottom line for schools is academic
performance, and health issues are generally secondary.
National policies providing adequate incentives or
financial support may be necessary to bring about
widespread change in schools - no matter how good a
particular educational programme may be. Even the
provision of food within the schools encounters linkages
with government
supporting school
lunches, availability of fresh foods, and economic issues
linked to the common situation that revenues from food
sales and fundraising parents are the only discretionary
funds available to schools.

food policies

Another example is found in urban planning. The use
of stairs instead of elevators is often recommended for
people who want to increase physical activity. To support
this approach, efforts have been made to work with
building designers to make stairs more attractive and
convenient, and elevators less so. These efforts have run
into myriad problems,
fire
safety standards, design expectations, and architectural
prerogative. Even simple solutions become complex.

including building codes,

State and national level policies are linked to interna-
tional markets and the level of economic development of
countries. International monetary agencies and banks
may encourage/require debtor countries to use more of
their agricultural capacity for export rather than local food
supplies, shifting food availability and cost. The activities
of
international corporations greatly influence food
availability and demand through advertising and other
marketing;
the foods most widely and intensively
marketed are likely to have a long shelf life, a very high
profit margin, and be easily transported around the globe.
International corporations similarly influence purchasing
capacity through salaries, and energy expenditure
through the level of labour required to earn income.

In this web there is no single organisational

locus
where motivation to change behaviour can result in a
decline in obesity without interference from competing
interests. Coalitions with commitment to change must be
formed across all levels, founded on mutual interest. This
is the classic situation that requires a broad-based public
health perspective56.

514

A Astrup

Fig. 8 The ‘Causal Web of societal influences on obesity prevalence’. The rectangle after the first column signifies the ‘cultural filter’
representing influences varying from traditional customs and practices to media and advertising56

References

1 Obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic.
Report of a WHO Consultation on Obesity, Geneva 3–5 June
1997. Geneva: WHO Publications, 1997.

2 Prevention of diabetes mellitus. Report of a WHO study

group. WHO Technical Report Series, No. 844, 1994.

3 Astrup A, Finer N. Redefining type 2 diabetes: ‘Diabesity’ or
‘Obesity Dependent Diabetes Mellitus’? Obes. Rev. 2000; in
press.

4 Colditz GA, Willett WC, Rotnitzky A, Manson JAE. Weight
gain as a risk factor for clinical diabetes mellitus in women.
Ann. Intern. Med. 1995; 122: 481–6.

5 Sjo¨stro¨m CD, Lissner L, Wedel H, Sjo¨stro¨m L. Reduction of
incidence in diabetes, herpertension and lipid disturbances
after intentional weight loss induced by bariatric surgery: the
SOS intervention study. Obes. Res. 1999; 7: 477–84.

6 Sjo¨stro¨m L. Obesity, diabetes and other cardiovascular risk
factors. Lessons from SOS. Int. J. Obes. 2000; 24(Suppl. 1): S7
(Abs 14).

7 Heymsfield SB, Segal KR, Hauptman J, Lucas CP, Boldrin MN,
Rissanen A, Wilding JPH, Sjo¨stro¨m L. Effect of weight loss
with Orlistat on glucose tolerance and progression to type 2
diabetes in obese adults. Arch. Intern. Med. 2000; 160:
1321–6.

8 Williamson DF, Pamuk E, Thun M, Flanders D, Byers T,
Health C. Prospective study of intentional weight loss and
mortality in never-smoking overweight US white women
aged 40–64. Am. J. Epidemiol. 1995; 141: 1128–41.

9 King H, Aubert RE, Herman WH. Global burden of diabetes

1995–2025. Diabetes Care 1998; 21: 1414–1431.

10 Astrup A. Macronutrient balances and obesity: the role of diet

and physical activity. Pub. Health Nutr. 1999; 2: 341–7.

11 James WPT, Ralph A. Implementing dietary change: theory
and practice. Obesity. New understanding in obesity
research. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 1999; 58: 385–93.

12 Blundell JE, Cooling J. Routes to obesity: phenotypes, food

choices and activity. Br. J. Nutr. 2000; 83: S33–8.

13 Bray GA, Popkin BM. Dietary fat intake does affect obesity.

Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1998; 68: 1157–73.

14 Astrup A, Ryan L, Grunwald G, Storgaard M, Saris W, Hill JO.
Ad libitum low-fat diets and body fatness: A meta-analysis of
intervention studies. Br. J. Nutr. 2000; 83(suppl 1): S25–32.
15 Goris AHC, Westerterp-Plantenga MS, Westerterp KR. Under-
eating and underrecording of habitual food intake in obese
men: selective underreporting of fat intake. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2000; 71: 130–4.

16 Harnack LJ, Jeffrey RW, Boutelle KN. Temporal trends in
energy intake in the United States: an ecological perspective.
Am. J. Clin. Nutri. 2000; 71: 1478–84.

17 Willet WC. Is dietary fat a major determinant of body fat? Am.

J. Clin. Nutr. 1998; 67: 556S–62S.

18 Yu-Poth S, Zhao G, Etherton T, Naglak M, Jonnalagadda S,
Kris-Etherton PM. Effects of the national cholesterol educa-
tion program’s step I and step II dietary intervention
programs on cardiovascular disease risk factors: a meta-
analysis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1999; 69: 632–46.

19 Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations.

Get the best from your food. 1992.

Prevention of obesity and type II diabetes

515

20 Ludwig DS, Majzoub JA, Al-Zahrani A, Dallal GE, Blanco I,
Roberts SB. High glycemic index foods, overeating, and
obesity. Pediatrics 1999; 103: 26.

21 Bolton-Smith C, Woodward M. Dietary composition and fat
to sugar ratios in relation to obesity. Int. J. Obes. 1994; 18:
820–8.

22 Raben A, Macdonald I, Astrup A. Replacement of dietary fat by
sucrose or starch: Effects on 14 days’ ad libitum energy intake,
energy expenditure and body weight in formerly obese and
neverobese subjects. Int. J. Obes. 1997; 21: 846–59.

23 Saris WHM, Astrup A, Prentice AM, Zunft FHJ, Formiguera X,
Verboeket-van de Venne WPHG, Raben A, Poppitt SD,
Seppelt B, Johnston S, Vasilaras TH, Keogh G. Randomised
controlled trial on changes in dietary carbohydrate/fat ratio
and simple vs. complex carbohydrates on body weight and
blood lipids: the CARMEN study. Int. J. Obes. 2000; in press.
24 Salmeron J, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Wing AL,
Willett WC. Dietary fiber, glycemic load, and risk of non-
insulin –dependent diabetes mellitus in women. JAMA 1997;
277: 472–7.

25 Salmeron J, Ascherio A, Rimm EB, et al. Dietary fiber,
glycemic load, and risk of NIDDM in men. Diabetes Care
1997; 20: 545–50.

26 Schaefer EJ, Lichtenstein AH, Lamon-Fava S, McNamara JR,
Schaefer MM, Rasmussen H, et al. Body weight and low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol changes after consumption of
a low-fat ad libitum diet. JAMA 1995; 274: 1450–5.

27 Clinical Guidelines on the identification, evaluation, and
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults – The
Evidence Report. Obes. Res. 1998; 6(suppl.2): 51S–210S.

28 Frost G, Leeds AA, Dore´ CJ, Madeiros S, Brading S, Dornhorst
A. Glycaemic index as a determinant of serum HDL-
cholesterol concentration. Lancet 1999; 353: 1045–8.

29 Nordiska Ministerra˚d. Nordiska na¨ringsrekommendationer

1996. Copenhagen, 1996.

30 Panel on Dietary Reference Values of the Committee on
Medical Aspects of Food Policy, The Department of Health.
Dietary reference values for food energy and nutrients for the
United Kingdom. HMSO, London, 1991.

31 Ha TKK, Lean MEJ. Recommendations for the nutritional
management of patients with diabetes mellitus. Eur. J. Clin.
Nutr. 1998; 52: 467–81.

32 Roland-Cachera MF, Deheeger M. Nutrient balance and
android body fat distribution: why not a role for protein?
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1996; 61: S960–7.

33 Skov AR, Toubro S, Rønn B, Holm L, Astrup A. Randomized
trial on protein versus carbohydrate in ad libitum fat reduced
diet for the treatment of obesity. Int. J. Obes. 1999; 23: 528–
36.

34 Hill MJ. Meat and colo-rectal cancer. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 1999;

58: 261–4.

35 Bingham SA. High-meat diets and cancer risk. Proc. Nutr.

Soc. 1999; 58: 243–8.

36 Dulloo AG, Mensi N, Seydoux J, Girardier L. Differential
effects of high-fat diets varying in fatty acid composition on
the efficiency of lean and fat tissue deposition during weight
recovery after low food intake. Metabolism 1995; 44: 273–9.
37 Doucet E, Amere´ras N, White MD, Despre´s J-P, Bouchard C,
Tremblay A. Dietary fat composition and human adiposity.
Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 1998; 52: 2–6.

38 Lawton CL, Delary HJ, Brockman J, Smith FC, Blundell JE.

The degree of saturation of
ingestive satiety. Br. J. Nutr. 2000; 83: 473–82.

fatty acids influences post-

39 Prentice AM. Alcohol and obesity.

Int.

J. Obes. 1995;

19(suppl. 5): S44–50.

40 Fogelholm M, Kukkonen-Harjula K. Does physical activity
prevent weight gain – a systematic review. Obes. Rev. 2000;
in press.

41 Prentice AM, Jebb SA. Obesity in Britain: Gluttony or sloth?

Br. Med. J. 1995; 311: 437–9.

42 Schoeller DA, Shay K, Kushner RF. How much physical
activity is needed to minimize weight gain in previously
obese women? Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1997; 66: 551–6.

43 Ferro-Luzzi A, Martino L. Obesity and physical activity. The
origins and consequences of obesity, CIBA Foundation
Symposium 201. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.

44 Nagle DL, McGrail SH, Vitale J, Woolf EA, Dussault BJ,
DiRocco L, et al. The mahogany protein is a receptor
involved in suppression of obesity. Nature 1999; 398: 148–52.
45 Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, Barone M, Leopold L,
Friedman JM. Positional cloning of the obese mouse gene
and its human homologue. Nature 1994; 372: 425–32.

46 Farooqi IS, Jebb SA, Langmark G, Lawrence E, Cheetham CH,
Prentice AM, Hughes IA, McCamish MA, O’Rahilly S. Effects
of reombinant leptin therapy in a child with congenital leptin
deficiency. N. Engl. J. Med. 1999; 341(12): 879–84.

47 Von Kries R, Koletzko B, Sauerwald T, von Mutius E, Barnert
D, Grunert V, von Voss H. Breast feeding and obesity: cross
sectional study. Brit. Med. J. 1999; 319: 147–50.

48 Meirhaeghe A, Helbecque N, Cottel D, Amouyel P. b2-
adrenoceptor gene polymorphism, body weight and physical
activity. Lancet 1999; 353: 896.

49 Astrup A, Flatt JP. Metabolic determinants of body weight
regulation. In: Bouchard C, Bray GA, eds. Regulation of Body
Weight, Biological and Behavioral Mechanisms – Dahlem
Workshop. Report LS 57. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, pp.
193–210, 1996.

50 Astrup A, Raben A, Buemann B, Toubro S. Fat metabolism in
the predisposition to obesity. Ann. NY. Acad. Sci. 1997; 827:
427–33.

51 Astrup A, Lundsgaard C, Stock MJ. Is obesity contagious? Int.

J. Obes. 1998; 22: 375–6.

52 Stubbs RJ, Harbron CG, Murgatroyd PR, Prentice AM. Covert
manipulation of dietary fat and energy density: effect on
substrate flux and food intake in men eating ad libitum. Am.
J. Clin. Nutr. 1995; 62: 316–29.

53 Stubbs RJ, Ritz P, Coward WA, Prentice AM. Covert
manipulation of the dietary fat to carbohydrate ratio and
energy density: effect on food intake and energy balance in
free-living men, feeding ad libitum. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1995;
62: 330–7.

54 Lissner L, Heitmann BL, Bengtsson C. Low-fat diets may
prevent weight gain in sedentary women: Prospective
observations from the population study of women in
Gothenburg, Sweden. Obes. Res. 1997; 5(1): 43–8.

55 Manios Y, Moschandreas J, Hatzis C, Kafatos A. Evaluation of
a health and nutrition education program in primary school
children of Crete over a three-year period. Prev. Med. 1999;
28: 149–59.

56 Kumanyika S, Jeffery R, Ritenbaugh C, Morabia A, Antipatis
V. Causal Web of Societal influences on obesity prevalence.
www.iotf.org/groups/phapo (1999).

