L A N D M A R K   S T U D I E S

The Effect of Fruit and Vegetable Intake on  

the Incidence of Diabetes 

Reviewed by Crystal Wiley Cene, MD, MPH, and Michael Pignone, MD, MPH

STUDY
Carter P, Gray LJ, Troughton J, 
Khunti K, Davies MJ: Fruit and 
vegetable intake and incidence of  
type 2 diabetes mellitus: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
341:c422, 2010

SUMMARY
Design. Systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Subjects. Six prospective cohort 

studies with 223,412 total par-
ticipants were performed; only two 
studies included men. The mean age 
of participants ranged from 30 to 
74 years. Study length ranged from 
4.6 to 23 years (median length was 
13.4 years). All studies included an 
individual measure of fruits, vegeta-
bles, or combined fruit and vegetable 
intake. Three provided information 
on fruit and vegetable intake sepa-
rately and combined; two provided 
information on fruit and vegetable 
intake separately only; and one study 
provided only combined data. Four 
studies also included separate data on 
the intake of green leafy vegetables. 
Methods. Investigators calculated 
summary hazard ratios (HRs) and 
95% confidence intervals (CIs) for 
incidence of type 2 diabetes for 
the highest versus lowest quintiles 
of intake of fruit and/or vegetable 
consumption. HRs or relative risks 
from each study were pooled to give 
a summary estimate of risk using a 
random effects model. Investigators 
assessed for heterogeneity among 
studies’ estimated effects using the 

I2 statistic. Two reviewers indepen-
dently assessed all potentially relevant 
studies for inclusion and assessed 
the methodological quality of each 
included study. 

Results. The number of incident 
type 2 diabetes cases ranged from 
383 to 4,529 across the six studies. 
The meta-analysis of highest versus 
lowest quintiles of intake of fruit and 
vegetables did not identify statisti-
cally significant reductions in risk of 
type 2 diabetes incidence for con-
sumption of fruit, vegetables, or fruit 
and vegetables combined. The pooled 
HRs were 0.93 (95% CI 0.83–1.01) 
for fruit only, 0.91 (0.76–1.09) for 
vegetables only, and 1.00 (0.92–1.09) 
for fruit and vegetables combined. 
However, summary estimates showed 
that consuming 1.35 servings a day of 
green leafy vegetables (highest intake) 
compared with 0.2 servings (lowest 
intake) resulted in a 14% reduction in 
risk (P = 0.01) of type 2 diabetes 
(HR 0.86 [95% CI 0.77–0.96]).

Because of significant hetero-

geneity observed between studies, 
investigators did several sensitivity 
analyses to try to explain whether 
methodological differences between 
the studies (i.e., study location, 
participant sex, classification of food 
groups, method of dietary assess-
ment, and categorization of dietary 
intake) might account for the results. 
However, none of the factors exam-
ined accounted for the observed 
differences in study findings.

Conclusion. Overall, fruit and/or 
vegetable intake was not associated 

with a clearly reduced risk of incident 
type 2 diabetes. However, increasing 
consumption of green leafy vegeta-
bles of about one serving per day was 
associated with a statistically signifi-
cant 14% reduction in the risk of type 
2 diabetes. 

COMMENTARY
This systematic review and meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies 
examined whether intake of fruits and 
vegetables reduced the risk of type 2 
diabetes. Although the meta-analysis 
did not show clear reductions in the 
risk of incident type 2 diabetes for 
consumption of fruits, vegetables, or 
fruits and vegetables combined, there 
was a statistically significant risk 
reduction for consumption of green 
leafy vegetables.

In interpreting these results, it 
is important to note certain cave-
ats. First, only six studies met the 
inclusion criteria for this systematic 
review and only two of the stud-
ies included men in their samples. 
It is particularly noteworthy that 
none of the three studies that found 
a statistically significant inverse 
association between green leafy veg-
etables and incident type 2 diabetes 
included men. Second, there was 
inconsistency in which vegetables 
were considered to be green leafy 
vegetables, ranging from spinach 
and lettuce to Chinese greens. Third, 
given that the included studies used 
nonrandomized designs, it is possi-
ble that unmeasured or inadequately 
measured variables that are associ-

CLINICAL DIABETES • Volume 29, Number 3, 2011 

113

L A N D M A R K   S T U D I E S

ated with both the amount of fruit 
and/or vegetable intake and incident 
type 2 diabetes (e.g., race/ethnicity, 
socioeconomic status, educational 
level, and physical activity level) 
might have influenced the results. 
Fourth, only three of the six studies 
adjusted for age, BMI, and fam-
ily history of type 2 diabetes—all 
known risk factors for incident type 
2 diabetes . Finally, only two of the 
six studies used appropriate inclu-
sion and exclusion criteria, and two 
studies did not use a validated tool 
to assess fruit and vegetable intake. 

Beginning in 1985, the U.S. 

Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
Dietary Guidelines for Healthy 
Americans recommended consum-
ing at least two servings of fruit and 
three servings of vegetables daily.1 
Despite these recommendations, 
national initiatives, and increased 
media attention to the importance 
of consuming a healthy diet con-
sisting of a variety of fruits and 
vegetables, the overwhelming major-
ity of Americans fail to meet USDA 
dietary guidelines for fruit and 
vegetable consumption,2 and there 
was no change between the periods 
1988–1994 and 1999–2002.2

The 2005 dietary guidelines for 
Americans recommended consum-
ing 2 cups of fruit and 2.5 cups of 
vegetables per day for a reference 
2,000-calorie intake, with higher 
or lower amounts depending on the 
calorie level.3 Furthermore, they 
suggested selecting from all five 
vegetable subgroups (dark green, 
orange, legumes, starchy vegetables, 
and other vegetables) several times a 
week.

Unlike the 2005 dietary guide-
lines, the 2010 guidelines did not 
recommend precise quantities of 
fruits and vegetables that should be 
consumed; instead, they state that 
Americans should “increase intake 
of fruit and vegetables,” specifi-
cally by allowing half of one’s plate 

to consist of fruits and vegetables. 
Evidence from the systematic review 
that informed the 2010 guidelines3 is 
limited and inconsistent but sug-
gests an inverse relationship between 
total fruit and vegetable intake and 
the development of type 2 diabetes. 
Three of the five articles included 
in that systematic review were the 
same as those included in the cur-
rent systematic review. Therefore, it 
appears that, although the findings 
are essentially the same, the stated 
conclusions are slightly different and 
nuanced. 

Findings from the current sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis 
do not support a strong association 
between intake of fruit, vegetables, 
or combined fruit and vegetables 
and reduced type 2 diabetes risk. 
This finding is consistent with that of 
a previous systematic review on the 
topic4 as well as the evidence from 
systematic reviews conducted by the 
USDA and the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services.3 
However, the current systematic 
review suggests that increased intake 
of green leafy vegetables may lower 
type 2 diabetes risk.

This finding needs to be con-

firmed and further explicated (e.g., 
which specific vegetables constitute 
green leafy vegetables) in future 
research studies so that this infor-
mation can be incorporated into 
national recommendations, if appro-
priate. If it is confirmed, additional 
work will be required to implement 
the more specific recommendation 
to increase green, leafy vegetables. 
The current, less specific recom-
mendations may be more effective in 
increasing fruit consumption, which 
may not be as beneficial in terms of 
reduction in the risk of diabetes and 
other adverse health outcomes. 

The lack of strong evidence that 
increased fruit and vegetable intake 
reduces the risk of type 2 diabetes 
highlights the need to encourage a 

multi-modal approach for diabetes 
prevention, such as that used in the 
Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP). 
The DPP was a multicenter, random-
ized clinical trial that compared 
intensive lifestyle modification, 
standard care plus metformin, 
and standard care plus placebo to 
prevent or delay the development of 
type 2 diabetes in high-risk individu-
als.5 The lifestyle intervention, which 
was delivered in 16 individual ses-
sions during 24 weeks by a trained 
lifestyle coach, focused on improving 
diet, increasing physical activity, and 
overcoming barriers. Fifty percent of 
participants met the 7% weight loss 
goal, and 74% met the 150-minute-
per-week physical activity goal at the 
end of the 24-week core curriculum.6
The DPP decreased the incidence 

of diabetes by 58% in the intensive 
lifestyle intervention arm, compared 
to a 31% reduction in the metformin 
arm after a mean 2.8 years of follow-
up.6 This study highlighted the 
superiority of lifestyle modification 
for reducing diabetes risk. Although 
the public health community should 
continue to encourage greater fruit 
and vegetable (particularly green, 
leafy vegetable) consumption as a 
component of a healthy diet, more 
research is needed to definitively 
articulate its potential benefit on 
diabetes prevention. 

REFERENCES

1Center for Nutrition Policy and 

Promotion: Dietary guidelines for Americans 
[article online]. Available from http://www.
cnpp.usda.gov/DietaryGuidelines.htm. 
Accessed 15 April 2011

2Casagrande SS, Wang Y, Anderson 
C, Gary TL: Have Americans increased 
their fruit and vegetable intake? The trends 
between 1988 and 2002. Am J Prev Med 
32:257–263, 2007

3USDA Evidence Analysis Library: In 

adults, what is the relationship between 
the intake of vegetables and fruits, not 
including juice and type 2 diabetes? 
[article online] Available from http://www.
nutritionevidencelibrary.com/evidence.

114

Volume 29, Number 3, 2011 • CLINICAL DIABETES

L A N D M A R K   S T U D I E S

cfm?evidence_summary_id=250368. 
Accessed 15 April 2011

4Hamer M, Chida Y: Intake of fruit, 

vegetables, and antioxidants and risk of type 
2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. J Hypertens 25:2361–2369, 2007

5DPP Research Group: Design and 

methods for a clinical trial in the prevention 
of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 22:623–634, 
1999

6Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler 

SE, Hamman RF, Lachin JM, Walker EA, 
Nathan DM: Reduction in the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or 
metformin. N Engl J Med 346:393–403, 2002

Crystal Wiley Cene, MD, MPH, is an 
assistant professor of medicine, and 

Michael Pignone, MD, MPH, is a pro-
fessor of medicine in the Department 
of Medicine at the University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine in Chapel 
Hill. Dr. Pignone is also an associate 
editor of Clinical Diabetes. 

CLINICAL DIABETES • Volume 29, Number 3, 2011 

115

